

  The Book of Common Prayer:  E-text Edition (American, 1979)
  Version 1.0
  13 December 1993
 
FILE 2 of 11 (BCPOFFCE.TXT)
 
  BCPINFO  TXT  -- the "Readme" with duplicate Table of Contents
  BCPOFFCE TXT  -- the Daily Office and front matter
  BCPCOLCT TXT  -- the Collects
  BCPSPECL TXT  -- Special services and Baptism
  BCPEUCHR TXT  -- The Eucharist
  BCPASTRL TXT  -- Pastoral Offices (Marriage, Burial)
  BCPEPSCL TXT  -- Episcopal Offices (Confirmation, Ordination)
 
  BCPSALT1 TXT  -- The Psalter, part 1
  BCPSALT2 TXT  -- The Psalter, part 2
  BCPPRAYR TXT  -- Prayers and Thanks., Catechism, Historical Docs., Tables
 
  BCPLECTN TXT  -- Lectionary
 
You may retrieve this file by sending the command:
 
     GET BCPOFFCE TXT
 
in the *body* of a message to "listserv@american.edu" (and similarly
for the other files).
 
This file is also available at FTP archives as a single file BCP10.TXT.
FTP archives include:
 
  mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
 
  wiretap.spies.com
 
  world.std.com
 
 
If you are viewing this file with a word processor, we recommend you
reformat it with a non-proportional, 10 point font, such as Courier 10.
You should try to stop your program from automatically re-paragraphing
the text, since line breaks are significant.
 
This file, which should be called BCP10.TXT or bcp10.txt, is in the
PUBLIC DOMAIN.  You may make copies, distribute them, produce derivative
works, reformat, and make extracts from it.  If you do so, please do not
distribute this header along with your altered E-text.
 
In particular, if you remove this header, you may use this file in
proprietary retrieval systems or embed the text in software that you
sell.  We wish to encourage the production of hypertext systems, both
public domain and proprietary, containing the text of the _Book of
Common Prayer_, and also of commentaries in electronic format.
 
This version of the 1979 American version of the _Book of Common Prayer_
was edited by John E. Goodwin (jegoodwin@delphi.com).  The text was
contributed by members of the Electronic Mailing list ANGLICAN, which is
sponsored by American Methodist University, Washington, DC.  (The
university has no connection with the E-text project).
 
To subscribe to ANGLICAN, send the command "subscribe anglican" in the
*body* of a message to "listserv@american.edu".  You may then send
messages to "anglican@american.edu".  Notice that the addresses for
sign-on and posting are different.
 
Further details and acknowledgements are in file BCPINFO.TXT.
 
 
-------------------(end of header)------------------
 
<page 1>
 
<page 2>
 
<page 3>
 
THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER
 
and Administration of the Sacraments and Other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church
 
Together with The Psalter or Psalms of David
 
According to the use of
 
The Episcopal Church
 
THE SEABURY PRESS : NEW YORK
 
<page 4>
 
[The Certificate of the original.  Note that this electronic text is
NOT approved by the Custodian of the Standard Book of Common Prayer.]
 
<Certificate>
 
I certify that this edition of The Book of Common Prayer
has been compared with a certified copy of the Standard Book,
as the Canon directs, and that it conforms thereto.
 
Charles Mortimer Guilbert
=Custodian of the Standard Book of Common Prayer=
September, 1979
 
<Page 5>
 
 
 
<Table of Contents>
 
The Ratification of the Book of Common Prayer   8
 
The Preface   9
 
Concerning the Service of the Church  13
 
The Calendar of the Church Year  15
 
 
<The Daily Office>
 
Daily Morning Prayer: Rite One   37
 
Daily Evening Prayer: Rite One   61
 
Daily Morning Prayer: Rite Two   75
 
Noonday Prayer   103
 
Order of Worship for the Evening   108
 
Daily Evening Prayer: Rite Two    115
 
Compline   127
 
Daily Devotions for Individuals and Families   137
 
Table of Suggested Canticle   144
 
 
<The Great Litany>   148
 
 
<The Collects: Traditional>
 
Seasons of the Year   159
 
Holy Days   185
 
Common of Saints   195
 
Various Occasions   199
 
<page 6>
 
 
<The Collects: Contemporary>
 
Seasons of the Year   211
 
Holy Days   237
 
Common of Saints   246
 
Various Occasions   251
 
 
<Proper Liturgies for Special Days>
 
Ash Wednesday   264
 
Palm Sunday   270
 
Maundy Thursday   274
 
Good Friday   276
 
Holy Saturday   283
 
The Great Vigil of Easter   285
 
 
<Holy Baptism   299>
 
 
<The Holy Eucharist>
 
An Exhortation   316
 
A Penitential Order:  Rite One   319
 
The Holy Eucharist:  Rite One   323
 
A Penitential Order:  Rite Two   351
 
The Holy Eucharist:  Rite Two   355
 
Prayers of the People   383
 
Communion under Special Circumstances   396
 
An Order for Celebrating the Holy Eucharist   400
 
 
<Pastoral Offices>
 
Confirmation   413
 
A Form of Commitment to Christian Service   420
 
Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage   423
 
The Blessing of a Civil Marriage   433
 
An Order for Marriage   435
 
Thanksgiving for the Birth or Adoption of a Child   439
 
Reconciliation of a Penitent   447
 
Ministration to the Sick   453
 
Ministration at the Time of Death   462
 
<Page 7>
 
Burial of the Dead: Rite One   469
 
Burial of the Dead: Rite Two   491
 
An Order for Burial   506
 
 
<Episcopal Services>
 
Ordination of a Bishop   511
 
Ordination of a Priest   525
 
Ordination of a Deacon   537
 
Litany for Ordinations   548
 
Celebration of a New Ministry   557
 
Consecration of a Church or Chapel   567
 
 
<The Psalter, or Psalms of David>   585
 
 
<Prayers and Thanksgivings>   810
 
 
<An Outline of the Faith, or Catechism>   845
 
 
<Historical Documents of the Church>   864
(including the Articles of Religion)
 
 
<Tables for Finding the Date of Easter and other Holy Days>   880
 
 
<The Lectionary>   888
 
Year A   889
 
Year B   900
 
Year C   911
 
Holy Days   921
 
Common of Saints   925
 
Various Occasions   927
 
 
<Daily Office Lectionary>   934
 
Seasons of the Year   936
 
Holy Days   996
 
Special Occasions   1000
 
<page 8>
 
 
 
<The Ratification of the Book of Common Prayer (1789)>
 
By the Bishops, the Clergy, and the Laity of the Protestant Episcopal
Church in the United States of America, in Convention, this Sixteenth
Day of October, in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Eighty-Nine.
 
This Convention having, in their present session, set forth =A Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church,= do hereby establish the said Book:  And
they declare it to be the Liturgy of this Church: And require that it be
received as such by all the members of the same:  And this Book shall be
in use from and after the First Day of October, in the Year of Our Lord
one thousand seven hundred and ninety.
 
<page 9>
 
 
 
<Preface>
 
It is a most invaluable part of that blessed "liberty wherewith Christ
hath made us free," that in his worship different forms and usages may
without offense be allowed, provided the substance of the Faith be kept
entire; and that, in every Church, what cannot be clearly determined to
belong to Doctrine must be referred to Discipline; and therefore, by
common consent and authority, may be altered, abridged, enlarged,
amended, or otherwise disposed of, as may seem most convenient for the
edification of the people, "according to the various exigency of times
and occasions."
 
The Church of England, to which the Protestant Episcopal Church in
these States is indebted, under God, for her first foundation and a long
continuance of nursing care and protection, hath, in the Preface of her
Book of Common Prayer, laid it down as a rule, that "The particular
Forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be
used therein, being things in their own nature indifferent, and
alterable, and so acknowledged; it is but reasonable that upon weighty
and important considerations, according to the various exigency of times
and occasions, such changes and alterations should be made therein, as
to those that are in place of Authority should, from time to time, seem
either necessary or expedient."
 
The same Church hath not only in her Preface, but likewise in her
Articles and Homilies, declared tho necessity and expediency of
occasional alterations and amendments in her Forms of Public Worship;
and we find accordingly, that, seeking to keep the happy mean between
too much stiffness in refusing, and too much easiness in admitting
variations in
 
<page 10>
 
things once advisedly established, she hath, in the reign of several
Princes, since the first compiling of her Liturgy in the time of Edward
the Sixth, upon just and weighty considerations her thereunto moving,
yielded to make such alterations in some particulars, as in their
respective times were thought convenient; yet so as that the main body
and essential parts of the same (as well in the chiefest materials, as
in the frame and order thereof) have still been continued firm and
unshaken
 
Her general aim in these different reviews and alterations hath been, as
she further declares in her said Preface, to do that which, according to
her best understanding, might most tend to the preservation of peace and
unity in the Church; the procuring of reverence, and the exciting of
piety and devotion in the worship of God; and, finally, the cutting off
occasion, from them that seek occasion, of cavil or quarrel against her
Liturgy.  And although, according to her judgment, there be not any
thing in it contrary to the Word of God, or to sound doctrine, or which
a godly man may not with a good conscience use and submit unto, or which
is not fairly defensible, if allowed such just and favourable
construction as in common equity ought to be allowed to all human
writings; yet upon the principles already laid down, it cannot but be
supposed that further alterations would be found expedient.
Accordingly, a Commission for a review was issued in the year 1689:  but
this great and good work miscarried at that time; and the Civil
Authority has not since thought proper to revive it by any new
Commission.
 
But when in the course of Divine Providence, these American States
became independent with respect to civil government, their
ecclesiastical independence was necessarily included; and the different
religious denominations of Christians in these States were left at full
and equal liberty to model and organize their respective Churches, and
forms of worship, and discipline, in such manner as they might judge
most convenient for their future prosperity; consistently with the
constitution and laws of their country.
 
The attention of this Church was in the first place drawn to those
alterations in the Liturgy which became necessary in the prayers for our
Civil Rulers, in consequence of the Revolution.  And the principal care
herein was to make them conformable to what ought to be the proper
end of all such prayers, namely, that "Rulers may have grace, wisdom,
<page 11>
and understanding to execute justice, and to maintain truth;" and that
the people "may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and
honesty."
 
But while these alterations were in review before the Convention, they
could not but, with gratitude to God, embrace the happy occasion which
was offered to them (uninfluenced and unrestrained by any worldly
authority whatsoever) to take a further review of the Public Service,
and to establish such other alterations and amendments therein as might
be deemed expedient.
 
It seems unnecessary to enumerate all the different alterations and
amendments.  They will appear, and it is to be hoped, the reasons of
them also, upon a comparison of this with the Book of Common Prayer of
the Church of England.  In which it will also appear that this Church is
far from intending to depart from the Church of England in any essential
point of doctrine, discipline, or worship; or further than local
circumstances require.
 
And now, this important work being brought to a conclusion, it is hoped
the whole will be received and examined by every true member of our
Church, and every sincere Christian, with a meek, candid, and charitable
frame of mind; without prejudice or prepossessions; seriously
considering what Christianity is, and what the truths of the Gospel are;
and earnestly beseeching Almighty God to accompany with his blessing
every endeavour for promulgating them to mankind in the clearest,
plainest, most affecting and majestic manner, for the sake of Jesus
Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour.
 
=Philadelphia, October, 1789=
 
<page 12>
 
<page 13>
 
 
 
<Concerning the Service
of the Church>
 
The Holy Eucharist, the principal act of Christian worship on the Lord's
Day and other major Feasts, and Daily Morning and Evening Prayer, as
set forth in this Book, are the regular services appointed for public
worship in the Church.
 
In addition to these services and the other rites contained in this
Book, other forms set forth by authority within this Church may be used.
Also, subject to the direction of the bishop, special devotions taken
from this Book, or from Holy Scripture, may be used when the needs of
the  congregation so require.
 
For special days of thanksgiving, appointed by civil or Church
authority, and for other special occasions for which no service or
prayer has been provided in this Book, the bishop may set forth such
forms as are fitting to the occasion.
 
In all services, the entire Christian assembly participates in such a
way that the members of each order within the Church, lay persons,
bishops, priests, and deacons, fulfull the functions proper to their
respective orders, as set forth in the rubrical directions for each
service.
 
The leader of worship in a Christian assembly is normally a bishop or
priest.  Deacons by virtue of their order do not exercise a presiding
function; but, like lay persons, may officiate in the Liturgy of the
Word, whether in the form provided in the Daily Office, or (when a
bishop or priest is not present) in the form appointed at the Eucharist.
Under exceptional circumstances, when the services of a priest cannot be
obtained, the bishop may, at discretion, authorize a deacon to preside
<page 14>
at other rites also, subject to the limitations described in the
directions for each service.
 
In any of the Proper Liturgies for Special Days, and in other services
contained within this Book celebrated in the context of a Rite One
service, the contemporary idiom may be conformed to traditional
language.
 
Hymns referred to in the rubrics of this Book are understood as those
authorized by this Church.  The words of anthems are to be from
Holy Scripture, or from this Book, or from texts congruent with them.
 
On occasion, and as appropriate, instrumental music may be substituted
for a hymn or anthem.
 
Where rubrics indicate that a part of a service is to be "said," it must
be understood to include "or sung," and =vice versa.=
 
When it is desired to use music composed for them, previously authorized
liturgical texts may be used in place of the corresponding texts in this
Book.
 
Scriptural citations in this Book, except for the Psalms, follow the
numeration of the Revised Standard Version of the Bible.
 
<page 15>
 
 
 
<The Calendar
of the Church Year>
 
The Church Year consists of two cycles of feasts and holy days:  one is
dependent upon the movable date of the Sunday of the Resurrection or
Easter Day; the other, upon the fixed date of December 25, the Feast of
our Lord's Nativity or Christmas Day.
 
Easter Day is always the first Sunday after the full moon that falls on
or after March 21.  It cannot occur before March 22 or after April 25.
 
The sequence of all Sundays of the Church Year depends upon the date of
Easter Day.  But the Sundays of Advent are always the four Sundays
before Christmas Day, whether it occurs on a Sunday or a weekday.  The
date of Easter also determines the beginning of Lent on Ash Wednesday,
and the feast of the Ascension on a Thursday forty days after Easter
Day.
 
 
<1.  Principal Feasts>
 
The Principle Feasts observed in this Church are the following:
 
Easter Day
 
Ascension Day
 
The Day of Pentecost
 
Trinity Sunday
 
 
All Saint's Day : November 1
 
Christmas Day : December 25
 
The Epiphany : January 6
 
These feasts take precedence of any other day or observance.  All
Saints' Day may always be observed on the Sunday following November 1,
in addition to its observance on the fixed date.
 
<page 16>
 
 
<2. Sundays>
 
All Sundays of the year are feasts of our Lord Jesus Christ.  In
addition to the dated days listed above, only the following feasts,
appointed on fixed days, take precedence of a Sunday:
 
The Holy Name
 
The Presentation
 
The Transfiguration
 
The feast of the Dedication of a Church, and the feast of its patron or
title, may be observed on, or be transferred to, a Sunday, except in the
seasons of Advent, Lent, and Easter.
 
All other Feasts of our Lord, and all other Major Feasts appointed on
fixed days in the Calendar, when they occur on a Sunday, are normally
transferred to the first convenient open day within the week.  When
desired, however, the Collect, Preface, and one or more of the Lessons
appointed for the Feast may be substituted for those of the Sunday, but
not from the Last Sunday after Pentecost through the First Sunday after
the Epiphany, or from the Last Sunday after the Epiphany through
Trinity Sunday.
 
With the express permission of the bishop, and for urgent and sufficient
reason, some other special occasion may be observed on a Sunday.
 
 
<3. Holy Days>
 
The following Holy Days are regularly observed throughout the year.
Unless otherwise ordered in the preceding rules concerning Sundays, they
have precedence over all other days of commemoration or of special
observance:
 
=Other Feasts of Our Lord=
 
The Holy Name
 
The Presentation
 
The Annunciation
 
The Visitation
 
 
Saint John the Baptist
 
The Transfiguration
 
Holy Cross Day
 
<page 17>
 
 
=Other Major Feasts=
 
All feasts of Apostles
 
All feasts of Evangelists
 
Saint Stephen
 
The Holy Innocents
 
Saint Joseph
 
Saint Mary Magdalene
 
 
Saint Mary the Virgin
 
Saint Michael and All Angels
 
Saint James of Jerusalem
 
Independence Day
 
Thanksgiving Day
 
 
=Fasts=
 
Ash Wednesday
 
Good Friday
 
 
Feasts appointed of fixed days in the Calendar are not observed on the
days of Holy Week or of Easter Week.  Major Feasts falling in these
weeks are transferred to the week following the Second Sunday of Easter,
in the order of their occurrence.
 
Feasts appointed on fixed days in the Calendar do not take precedence of
Ash Wednesday.
 
Feasts of our Lord and other Major Feasts appointed on fixed days,
which fall upon or are transferred to a weekday, may be observed on any
open day within the week.  This provision does not apply to Christmas
Day, the Epiphany, and All Saints' Day.
 
 
<4. Days of Special Devotion>
 
The following days are observed by special acts of discipline and
self-denial:
 
Ash Wednesday and the other weekdays of Lent and of Holy Week,
except the feast of the Annunciation.
 
Good Friday and all other Fridays of the year, in commemoration of the
Lord's crucifixion, except for Fridays in the Christmas and Easter
seasons, and any Feasts of our Lord which occur on a Friday.
 
 
<5. Days of Optional Observance>
 
Subject to the rules of precedence governing Principal Feasts, Sundays,
<page 18>
and Holy Days, the following may be observed with the Collects, Psalms,
and Lessons duly authorized by this Church:
 
Commemorations listed in the Calendar
 
Other Commemorations, using the Common of Saints
 
The Ember Days, traditionally observed on the Wednesdays, Fridays, and
Saturdays after the First Sunday in Lent, the Day of Pentecost, Holy
Cross Day, and December 13.
 
The Rogation Days, traditionally observed on Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday before Ascension Day
 
Various Occasions
 
Provided, that there is no celebration of the Eucharist for any such
occasion on Ash Wednesday, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Holy
Saturday; and provided further, that none of the Propers appointed for
Various Occasions is used as a substitute for, or as an addition to, the
Proper appointed for the Principal Feasts.
 
<page 19>
 
 
*January*
 
   1  A : *The Holy Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ*
 
   2  b
 
   3  c
 
   4  d
 
   5  e
 
   6  f : *The Epiphany of Our Lord Jesus Christ*
 
   7  g
 
   8  A
 
   9  b
 
   10 c : William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1645
 
   11 d
 
   12 e
 
   13 f : Hilary, Bishop of Poitiers, 367
 
   14 g
 
   15 A
 
   16 b
 
   17 c : Antony, Abbot in Egypt, 356
 
   18 d : *The Confession of Saint Peter the Apostle*
 
   19 e : Wulfstan, Bishop of Worcester, 1095
 
   20 f : Fabian, Bishop and Martyr of Rome, 250
 
   21 g : Agnes, Martyr at Rome, 304
 
   22 A : Vincent, Deacon of Saragossa, and Martyr, 304
 
   23 b : Phillips Brooks, Bishop of Massachusetts, 1893
 
   24 c
 
   25 d : *The Conversion of Saint Paul the Apostle*
 
   26 e : Timothy and Titus, Companions of Saint Paul
 
   27 f : John Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, 407
 
   28 g : Thomas Aquinas, Priest and Friar, 1274
 
   29 A
 
   30 b
 
   31 c
 
 
<page 20>
 
 
*February*
 
   1  d
 
   2  e : *The Presentation of Our Lord Jesus Christ in the Temple*
 
   3  f : Anskar, Archbishop of Hamburg, Missionary to Denmark and
Sweden, 865
 
   4  g : Cornelius the Centurion
 
   5  A : The Martyrs of Japan, 1597
 
   6  b
 
   7  c
 
   8  d
 
   9  e
 
   10 f
 
   11 g
 
   12 A
 
   13 b : Absalom Jones, Priest, 1818
 
   14 c : Cyril, Monk, and Methodius, Bishop, Missionaries to the Slavs,
869, 885
 
   15 d : Thomas Bray, Priest and Missionary, 1730
 
   16 e
 
   17 f
 
   18 g
 
   19 A
 
   20 b
 
   21 c
 
   22 d
 
   23 e : Polycarp, Bishop and Martyr of Smyrna, 156
 
   24 f : *Saint Matthias the Apostle*
 
   25 g
 
   26 A
 
   27 b : George Herbert, Priest, 1633
 
   28 c
 
   29
 
<page 21>
 
 
*March*
 
   1  d : David, Bishop of Menevia, Wales, c. 544
 
   2  e : Chad, Bishop of Lichfield, 672
 
   3  f : John and Charles Wesley, Priests, 1791, 1788
 
   4  g
 
   5  A
 
   6  b
 
   7  c : Perpetua and Her Companions, Martyrs at Carthage, 202
 
   8  d
 
   9  e : Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, c. 394
 
   10 f
 
   11 g
 
   12 A : Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, 604
 
   13 b
 
   14 c
 
   15 d
 
   16 e
 
   17 f : Patrick, Bishop and Missionary of Ireland, 461
 
   18 g : Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, 386
 
   19 A : *Saint Joseph*
 
   20 b : Cuthbert, Bishop of Lindisfarne, 687
 
   21 c : Thomas Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells, 1711
 
14 22 d : James De Koven, Priest, 1879
 
 3 23 e : Gregory the Illuminator, Bishop and Missionary of Armenia, 332
 
   24 f
 
11 25 g : *The Annunciation of Our Lord Jesus Christ to the Blessed
Virgin Mary*
 
   26 A
 
19 27 b : Charles Henry Brent, Bishop of the Philippines, and of Western
New York, 1929
 
 8 28 c
 
   29 d : John Keble, Priest, 1866
 
16 30 e
 
 5 31 f : John Donne, Priest, 1631
 
<page 22>
 
 
*April*
 
   1  g : Frederick Denison Maurice, Priest, 1872
 
13 2  A : James Lloyd Breck, Priest, 1876
 
 2 3  b : Richard, Bishop of Chichester, 1253
 
   4  c
 
10 5  d
 
   6  e
 
18 7  f
 
 7 8  g : William Augustus Muhlenberg, Priest, 1877
 
   9  A : William Law, Priest, 1761
 
15 10 b
 
 4 11 c : George Augustus Selwyn, Bishop of New Zealand, and of
Lichfield, 1878
 
   12 d
 
12 13 e
 
 1 14 f
 
   15 g
 
 9 16 A
 
17 17 b
 
 6 18 c
 
   19 d : Alphege, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Martyr, 1012
 
   20 e
 
   21 f : Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1109
 
   22 g
 
   23 A
 
   24 b
 
   25 c : *Saint Mark the Evangelist*
 
   26 d
 
   27 e
 
   28 f
 
   29 g : Catherine of Siena, 1380
 
   30 A
 
 
<page 23>
 
 
*May*
 
   1  b : *Saint Philip and Saint James, Apostles*
 
   2  c : Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, 373
 
   3  d
 
   4  e : Monnica, Mother of Augustine of Hippo, 387
 
   5  f
 
   6  g
 
   7  A
 
   8  b : Dame Julian of Norwich, c. 1417
 
   9  c : Gregory of Nazianzus, Bishop of Constantinople, 389
 
   10 d
 
   11 e
 
   12 f
 
   13 g
 
   14 A
 
   15 b
 
   16 c
 
   17 d
 
   18 e
 
   19 f : Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury, 988
 
   20 g : Alcuin, Deacon, and Abbot of Tours, 804
 
   21 A
 
   22 b
 
   23 c
 
   24 d : Jackson Kemper, First Missionary Bishop in the United States,
1870
 
   25 e : Bede, the Venerable, Priest, and Monk of Jarrow, 735
 
   26 f : Augustine, First Archbishop of Canterbury, 605
 
   27 g
 
   28 A
 
   29 b
 
   30 c
 
   31 d : *The Visitation of the Virgin Mary*
 
*The First Book of Common Prayer, 1549, is appropriately observed on a
weekday following the Day of Pentecost.*
 
<page 24>
 
 
*June*
 
   1  e : Justin, Martyr at Rome, c. 167
 
   2  f : The Martyrs of Lyons, 177
 
   3  g : The Martyrs of Uganda, 1886
 
   4  A
 
   5  b : Boniface, Archbishop of Mainz, Missionary to Germany, and
Martyr, 754
 
   6  c
 
   7  d
 
   8  e
 
   9  f : Columba, Abbot of Iona, 597
 
   10 g : Ephrem of Edessa, Syria, Deacon, 373
 
   11 A : *Saint Barnabas the Apostle
 
   12 b
 
   13 c
 
   14 d : Basil the Great, Bishop of Caesarea, 379
 
   15 e
 
   16 f : Joseph Butler, Bishop of Durham, 1752
 
   17 g
 
   18 A : Bernard Mizeki, Catechist and Martyr in Rhodesia, 1896
 
   19 b
 
   20 c
 
   21 d
 
   22 e : Alban, First Martyr of Britain, c. 304
 
   23 f
 
   24 g : *The Nativity of Saint John the Baptist*
 
   25 A
 
   26 b
 
   27 c
 
   28 d : Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, c. 202
 
   29 e : *Saint Peter and Saint Paul, Apostles*
 
   30 f
 
<page 25>
 
 
*July*
 
   1  g
 
   2  A
 
   3  b
 
   4  c : *Independence Day*
 
   5  d
 
   6  e
 
   7  f
 
   8  g
 
   9  A
 
   10 b
 
   11 c : Benedict of Nursia, Abbot of Monte Casino, c. 540
 
   12 d
 
   13 e
 
   14 f
 
   15 g
 
   16 A
 
   17 b : William White, Bishop of Pennsylvania, 1836
 
   18 c
 
   19 d
 
   20 e
 
   21 f
 
   22 g : *Saint Mary Magdalene*
 
   23 A
 
   24 b : Thomas a Kempis, Priest, 1471
 
   25 c : *Saint James the Apostle*
 
   26 d : The Parents of the Blessed Virgin Mary
 
   27 e : William Reed Huntington, Priest, 1909
 
   28 f
 
   29 g : Mary and Martha of Bethany
 
   30 A : William Wilberforce, 1833
 
   31 b : Joseph of Arimathaea
 
 
<page 26>
 
 
*August*
 
   1  c
 
   2  d
 
   3  e
 
   4  f
 
   5  g
 
   6  A : *The Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ*
 
   7  b : John Mason Neale, Priest, 1866
 
   8  c : Dominic, Priest and Friar, 1221
 
   9  d
 
   10 e : Lawrence, Deacon, and Martyr at Rome, 258
 
   11 f : Clare, Abbess at Assisi, 1253
 
   12 g
 
   13 A : Jeremy Taylor, Bishop of Down, Connor, and Dromore, 1667
 
   14 b
 
   15 c : *Saint Mary the Virgin, Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ*
 
   16 d
 
   17 e
 
   18 f : William Porcher DuBose, Priest, 1918
 
   19 g
 
   20 A : Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, 1153
 
   21 b
 
   22 c
 
   23 d
 
   24 e : *Saint Bartholomew the Apostle*
 
   25 f : Louis, King of France, 1270
 
   26 g
 
   27 A
 
   28 b : Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, 430
 
   29 c
 
   30 d
 
   31 e : Aidan, Bishop of Lindisfarne, 651
 
<page 27>
 
 
*September*
 
   1  f
 
   2  g : The Martyrs of New Guinea, 1942
 
   3  A
 
   4  b
 
   5  c
 
   6  d
 
   7  e
 
   8  f
 
   9  g
 
   10 A
 
   11 b
 
   12 c : John Henry Hobart, Bishop of New York, 1830
 
   13 d : Cyprian, Bishop and Martyr of Carthage, 258
 
   14 e : *Holy Cross Day*
 
   15 f
 
   16 g : Ninian, Bishop in Galloway, c. 430
 
   17 A
 
   18 b : Edward Bouverie Pusey, Priest, 1882
 
   19 c : Theodore of Tarsus, Archbishop of Canterbury, 690
 
   20 d : John Coleridge Patteson, Bishop of Melanesia, and his
Companions, Martyrs, 1971
 
   21 e : *Saint Matthew, Apostle and Evangelist*
 
   22 f
 
   23 g
 
   24 A
 
   25 b : Sergius, Abbot of Holy Trinity, Moscow, 1392
 
   26 c : Lancelot Andrewes, Bishop of Winchester, 1626
 
   27 d
 
   28 e
 
   29 f : *Saint Michael and All Angels*
 
   30 g : Jerome, Priest, and Monk of Bethlehem, 420
 
 
<page 28>
 
 
*October*
 
   1  A : Remigius, Bishop of Rheims, c. 530
 
   2  b
 
   3  c
 
   4  d : Francis of Assisi, Friar, 1226
 
   5  e
 
   6  f : William Tyndale, Priest, 1536
 
   7  g
 
   8  A
 
   9  b : Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln
 
   10 c
 
   11 d
 
   12 e
 
   13 f
 
   14 g
 
   15 A : Samuel Isaac Joseph Schereschewsky, Bishop of Shanghai, 1906
 
   16 b : Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley, Bishops, 1555, and Thomas
Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1556
 
   17 c : Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, and Martyr, c. 115
 
   18 d : *Saint Luke the Evangelist*
 
   19 e : Henry Martyn, Priest and Missionary to India and Persia, 1812
 
   20 f
 
   21 g
 
   22 A
 
   23 b : *Saint James of Jerusalem, Brother of Our Lord Jesus Christ,
and Martyr, c. 62*
 
   24 c
 
   25 d
 
   26 e : Alfred the Great, King of the West Saxons, 899
 
   27 f
 
   28 g : *Saint Simon and Saint Jude, Apostles*
 
   29 A : James Hannington, Bishop of Eastern Equatorial Africa, and his
Companions, Martyrs, 1885
 
   30 b
 
   31 c
 
<page 29>
 
 
*November*
 
   1  d : *All Saints*
 
   2  e : Commemoration of All Faithful Departed
 
   3  f : Richard Hooker, Priest, 1600
 
   4  g
 
   5  A
 
   6  b
 
   7  c : Willibrord, Archbishop of Utrecht, Missionary to Frisia, 739
 
   8  d
 
   9  e
 
   10 f : Leo the Great, Bishop of Rome, 461
 
   11 g : Martin, Bishop of Tours, 397
 
   12 A : Charles Simeon, Priest, 1836
 
   13 b
 
   14 c : Consecration of Samuel Seabury, First American Bishop, 1784
 
   15 d
 
   16 e : Margaret, Queen of Scotland, 1093
 
   17 f : Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, 1200
 
   18 g : Hilda, Abbess of Whitby, 680
 
   19 A : Elizabeth, Princess of Hungary, 1231
 
   20 b
 
   21 c
 
   22 d
 
   23 e : Clement, Bishop of Rome, c. 100
 
   24 f
 
   25 g
 
   26 A
 
   27 b
 
   28 c
   29 d
 
 
   30 e : *Saint Andrew the Apostle*
 
 
<page 30>
 
 
*December*
 
   1  f : Nicholas Ferrar, Deacon, 1637
 
   2  g : Channing Moore Williams, Missionary Bishop in China and Japan,
1910
 
   3  A
 
   4  b : John of Damascus, Priest, c. 760
 
   5  c : Clement of Alexandria, Priest, c. 210
 
   6  d : Nicholas, Bishop of Myra, c. 342
 
   7  e : Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, 397
 
   8  f
 
   9  g
 
   10 A
 
   11 b
 
   12 c
 
   13 d
 
   14 e
 
   15 f
 
   16 g
 
   17 A
 
   18 b
 
   19 c
 
   20 d
 
   21 e : *Saint Thomas the Apostle*
 
   22 f
 
   23 g
 
   24 A
 
   25 b : *The Nativity of Our Lord Jesus Christ*
 
   26 c : *Saint Stephen, Deacon and Martyr*
 
   27 d : *Saint John, Apostle and Evangelist*
 
   28 e : *The Holy Innocents*
 
   29 f
 
   30 g
 
   31 A
 
 
<page 31>
 
 
<The Titles of the Seasons
Sundays and Major Holy Days
observed in this Church throughout the Year>
 
 
=Advent Season=
 
The First Sunday of Advent
 
The Second Sunday of Advent
 
The Third Sunday of Advent
 
The Fourth Sunday of Advent
 
 
=Christmas Season=
 
The Nativity of Our Lord Jesus Christ: Christmas Day, December 25
 
The First Sunday after Christmas Day
 
The Holy Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, January 1
 
The Second Sunday after Christmas Day
 
 
=Epiphany Season=
 
The Epiphany, or the Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles,  January 6
 
The First Sunday after the Epiphany: The Baptism of Our Lord
 Jesus Christ
 
The Second Sunday through the Eighth Sunday after the Epiphany
 
The Last Sunday after the Epiphany
 
 
=Lenten Season=
 
The First Day of Lent, or Ash Wednesday
 
The First Sunday in Lent
 
The Second Sunday in Lent
 
The Third Sunday in Lent
 
The Fourth Sunday in Lent
 
The Fifth Sunday in Lent
 
 
=Holy Week=
 
The Sunday of the Passion: Palm Sunday
 
Monday in Holy Week
 
<page 32>
 
Tuesday in Holy Week
 
Wednesday in Holy Week
 
Maundy Thursday
 
Good Friday
 
Holy Saturday
 
 
=Easter Season=
 
Easter Eve
 
The Sunday of the Resurrection, or Easter Day
 
Monday in Easter Week
 
Tuesday in Easter Week
 
Wednesday in Easter Week
 
Thursday in Easter Week
 
Friday in Easter Week
 
Saturday in Easter Week
 
The Second Sunday of Easter
 
The Third Sunday of Easter
 
The Fourth Sunday of Easter
 
The Fifth Sunday of Easter
 
The Sixth Sunday of Easter
 
Ascension Day
 
The Seventh Sunday of Easter: The Sunday after Ascension Day
 
The Day of Pentecost: Whitsunday
 
 
=The Season After Pentecost=
 
The First Sunday after Pentecost: Trinity Sunday
 
The Second Sunday through the Twenty-Seventh Sunday after Pentecost
 
The Last Sunday after Pentecost
 
 
=Holy Days=
 
Saint Andrew the Apostle, November 30
 
Saint Thomas the Apostle, December 21
 
Saint Stephen, Deacon and Martyr, December 26
 
Saint John, Apostle and Evangelist, December 27
 
The Holy Innocents, December 28
 
The Confession of Saint Peter the Apostle, January 18
 
<page 33>
 
The Conversion of Saint Paul the Apostle, January 25
 
The Presentation of Our Lord Jesus Christ in the Temple, also called
 the Purification of Saint Mary the Virgin, February 2
 
Saint Matthias the Apostle, February 24
 
Saint Joseph, March 19
 
The Annunciation of Our Lord Jesus Christ to the Blessed Virgin Mary,
 March 25
 
Saint Mark the Evangelist, April 25
 
Saint Philip and Saint James, Apostles, May 1
 
The Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, May 31
 
Saint Barnabas the Apostle, June 11
 
The Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, June 24
 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, Apostles, June 29
 
Saint Mary Magdalene, July 22
 
Saint James the Apostle, July 25
 
The Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ, August 6
 
Saint Mary the Virgin, Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ, August 15
 
Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, August 24
 
Holy Cross Day, September 14
 
Saint Matthew, Apostle and Evangelist, September 21
 
Saint Michael and All Angels, September 29
 
Saint Luke the Evangelist, October 18
 
Saint James of Jerusalem, Brother of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and
 Martyr, October 23
 
Saint Simon and Saint Jude, Apostles, October 28
 
All Saints' Day, November 1
 
 
=National Days=
 
Independence Day, July 4
 
Thanksgiving Day
 
<page 34>
 
<page 35>
 
The Daily Office
 
<page 36>
 
 
<Concerning the Service>
 
*In the Daily Office, the term "Officiant" is used to denote the person,
clerical or lay, who leads the Office.*
 
*It is appropriate taht others persons be assigned to read the Lessons,
and to lead other parts of the service not assigned to the officiant.
The bishop, when present, apporpriately concludes the Office with a
blessing.*
 
*At celebrations of the Holy Eucharist, the Order for Morning or Evening
Prayer may be used in place of all that precedes the Offertory.*
 
*Additional Directions are on page 141.*
 
<page 37>
 
 
 
<Daily Morning Prayer:
Rite One>
 
 
*The Officiant begins the service with one or more of these sentences of
Scripture, or with the versicle "O Lord, open thou our lips" on page
42.*
 
 
=Advent=
 
Watch ye , for ye know not when the master of the house
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in
the morning; lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.
=Mark 13:35, 36=
 
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a
highway for our God.  =Isaiah 40:3=
 
The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
it together.  =Isaiah 40:5=
 
 
=Christmas=
 
Behold, I bring you good tidings of a great joy, which shall be
to all people.  For unto you is born this day in the city of
David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.  =Luke 2:10, 11=
 
Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God.  =Revelation 21:3=
 
<page 38>
 
 
=Epiphany=
 
The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the bright-
ness of thy rising.  =Isaiah 60:3=
 
I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be
my salvation unto the end of the earth.  =Isaiah 49:6b=
 
From the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the
same my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a
pure offering: for my Name shall be great among the heathen,
saith the Lord of hosts.  =Malachi 1:11=
 
 
=Lent=
 
If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us, but if we confess our sins, God is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.  =1 John 1:8, 9=
 
Rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the
Lord your God; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger and of great kindness, and repenteth him of evil.
=Joel 2:13=
 
I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him,
"Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee; and
am no more worthy to be called thy son."  =Luke 15:18, 19=
 
To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses,
though we have rebelled against him; neither have we obeyed
the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he
set before us.  =Daniel 9:9, 10=
 
Jesus said, "Whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me."  =Mark 8:34=
 
<page 38>
 
 
=Holy Week=
 
All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one
to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of
us all.  =Isaiah 53:6=
 
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?  Behold and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto
me, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me.  =Lamentations 1:12=
 
 
=Easter Season, including Ascension Day and the Day of
Pentecost=
 
Alleluia! Christ is risen.
=The Lord is risen indeed. Alleluia!=
 
This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and
be glad in it.  =Psalm 118:24=
 
Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.  =1 Corinthians 15:57=
 
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek the things which are
above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.
=Colossians 3:1=
 
Christ is not entered into a the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now
to appear in the presence of God for us.  =Hebrews 9:24=
 
Ye shall receive power after the Holy Ghost is come
upon you; and ye shall be witness unto me both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost part of the earth.  =Acts 1:8=
 
 
=Trinity Sunday=
 
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and
is to come.  =Revelation 4:8=
 
<page 40>
 
 
=All Saints and other Major Saints' Days=
 
We give thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.
=Colossians 1:12=
 
Ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens
with the saints and of the household of God.  =Ephesians 2:19=
 
Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words into
the ends of the world.  =Psalm 19:4=
 
 
=Occasions of Thanksgiving=
 
O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name; tell the
people what things he hath done.  =Psalm 105:1=
 
 
=At any Time=
 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ.  =Phillipians 1:2=
 
I was glad when they said unto me, "We will go into the
house of the Lord."  =Psalm 122:1=
 
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart,
be alway acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and
my redeemer.  =Psalm 19:14=
 
O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me,
and bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling.
=Psalm 43:3=
 
The Lord is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence
before him.  =Habakkuk 2:20=
 
The hour is cometh, and now is, when the true worshipers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father
seeketh such to worship him.  =John 4:23=
 
Thus saith the high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity,
<page 41>
whose name is Holy, "I dwell in the high and holy place, with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones."  =Isaiah 57:15=
 
 
*The following Confession of Sin may then be said; or the Office may
continue at once with "O Lord, open thou our lips."
 
 
<Confession of Sin>
 
*The Officiant says to the people*
 
Dearly beloved, we have come together in the presence of
Almighty God our heavenly Father, to render thanks for the
great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth
his most worthy praise, to hear this holy Word, and to ask, for
ourselves and on behalf of others, those things that are
necessary for our life and our salvation.  And so that we may
prepare ourselves in heart and mind to worship him, let us
kneel in silence, and with penitent and obedient hearts
confess our sins, that we may obtain forgiveness by his
infinite goodness and mercy.
 
*or this*
 
Let us humbly confess our sins unto Almighty God.
 
*Silence may be kept.*
 
*Officiant and People together, all kneeling*
 
Almighty and most merciful Father,
we have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep,
we have followed too much the devices and desires of our
/own hearts,
we have offended against thy holy laws,
we have left undone those things which we ought to
/have done,
<page 42>
and we have done those things which we ought not to
/have done.
But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us,
spare thou those who confess their faults,
restore thou those who are penitent,
according to thy promises declared unto mankind
in Christ Jesus our Lord;
and grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake,
that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life,
to the glory of thy holy Name.  Amen.
 
 
*The Priest alone stands and says*
 
The Almighty and merciful Lord grant you absolution and
remission of all your sins, true repentance, amendment of
life, and the grace and consolation of his Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
 
*A deacon or lay person using the preceding form remains kneeling, and
substitutes "us" for "you" and "our" for "your."
 
 
<The Invitatory and Psalter>
 
*All stand*
 
*Officiant* O Lord, open thou our lips.
*People*  And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.
 
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: as
it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*Except in Lent,*  Alleluia. *may be added.*
 
 
*Then follows one of the Invitatory Psalms, Venite or Jubilate.*
 
<page 43>
 
*One of the following Antiphons may be sung or said with the Invitatory
Psalm*
 
*In Advent*
 
Our King and Savior now draweth nigh:  O come, let us adore him.
 
 
*On the Twelve Days of Christmas*
 
Alleluia.  Unto us a child is born:  O come, let us adore him.
Alleluia.
 
 
*From the Epiphany through the Baptism of Christ, and on the Feasts of
the Transfiguration and Holy Cross*
 
The Lord hath manifested forth his glory:  O come, let us
adore him.
 
 
*In Lent*
 
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy:  O come, let us
adore him.
 
 
*From Easter Day until the Ascension*
 
Alleluia.  The Lord is risen indeed:  O come, let us adore him.
Alleluia.
 
 
*From Ascension Day until the Day of Pentecost*
 
Alleluia.  Christ the Lord ascendedeth into heaven:  O come,
 let us adore him. Alleluia.
 
 
*On the Day of Pentecost*
 
Alleluia.  The Spirit of the Lord filleth the world:  O come,
let us adore him.  Alleluia.
 
 
*On Trinity Sunday*
 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one God:  O come, let us
adore him.
 
<page 44>
 
*On other Sundays and weekdays*
 
The earth is the Lord's for he made it:  O come, let us
adore him.
 
*or this*
 
Worship the Lord in the beauty of his holiness:  O come, let us
adore him.
 
*or this*
 
The mercy of the Lord is everlasting:  O come, let us adore him.
 
 
*The Alleluias in the following Antiphons are used only in Easter
Season.*
 
 
*On Feasts of the Incarnation*
 
[Alleluia.] The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us:  O come, let us
adore him. [Alleluia.]
 
*On all Saints and other Major Saints' Days*
 
[Alleluia.]  The Lord is glorious in his saints:  O come, let us
adore him.  [Alleluia.]
 
 
<Venite>  =Psalm 95:1-7=
 
O come, let us sing unto the Lord; *
 let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.
 
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving *
 and show ourselves glad in him with psalms.
 
 
For the Lord is a great God, *
 and a great King above all gods.
 
In his hand are the corners of the earth, *
 and the strength of the hills is his also.
 
The sea is his, and he made it, *
 and his hands prepared the dry land.
 
<page 45>
 
O come, let us worship and fall down, *
 and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
 
For he is the Lord our God, *
 and we are the people of his pasture
 and the sheep of his hand.
 
 
O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness; *
 let the whole earth stand in awe of him.
 
For he cometh, for he cometh to judge the world
 and with righteousness to judge the world
 and the peoples with his truth.
 
*or Psalm 95, page 146.*
 
 
<Jubilate>  =Psalm 100=
 
Be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands; *
 serve the Lord with gladness
 and come before his presence with a song.
 
Be ye sure that the Lord he is God; *
 it is he that hath made us and we ourselves;
 we are his people and the sheep of his pasture.
 
O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving
and into his courts with praise; *
 be thankful unto him and speak good of his Name.
 
For the Lord is gracious;
his mercy is everlasting; *
 and his truth endureth from generation to generation.
 
*In Easter Week, in place of an Invitatory Psalm, the following is sung
or said.  It may also be used daily until the Day of Pentecost.*
 
<page 46>
 
 
<Christ our Passover>  =Pascha nostrum=
 
=1 Corinthians 5:7-8; Romans 6:9-11; 1 Corinthians 15:20-22=
 
Alleluia.
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us; *
 therefore let us keep the feast,
 
Not with old leaven,
neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, *
 but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.  Alleluia.
 
 
Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; *
 death hath no more dominion over him.
 
For in that he died, he died unto sin once; *
 but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.
 
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, *
 but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Alleluia.
 
 
Christ is risen from the dead, *
 and become the first fruits of them that slept.
 
For since by man came death, *
 by man came also the resurrection of the dead.
 
For as in Adam all die, *
 even so in Christ shall all be made alive.  Alleluia.
 
 
*Then follows*
 
 
<The Psalm or Psalms Appointed>
 
*At the end of the Psalms is sung or said*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
<page 47>
 
 
<The Lessons>
 
*One or two lessons, as appointed, are read, the Reader first saying*
 
A Reading (Lesson) from &mdash..
 
*A citation giving chapter and verse may be added.*
 
 
*After each Lesson the Reader may say*
 
The Word of the Lord.
 
*Answer* Thanks be to God.
 
*Or the Reader may say* Here endeth the Lesson (Reading).
 
*Silence may be kept after each Reading.  One of the following
Canticles, or one of those on pages 85-95 (Canticles 8-21), is sung or
said after each Reading.  If three Lessons are used, the Lesson from the
Gospel is read after the second Canticle.*
 
 
<Canticle 1>  A Song of Creation  =Benedicite, omnia opera Domini=
 
=Song of the Three Young Men, 35-65=
 
=I Invocation=
 
O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
O ye angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
=II The Cosmic Order=
 
O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye waters that be above the firmament, bless ye the Lord;
 
O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
<page 48>
 
O ye sun and moon, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord;
 
O ye showers and dew, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
O ye winds of God, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye fire and heat, bless ye the Lord;
 
O ye winter and summer, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
O ye dews and frosts, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye frost and cold, bless ye the Lord;
 
O ye ice and snow, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
O ye nights and days, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye light and darkness, bless ye the Lord;
 
O ye lightnings and clouds, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
=III The Earth and its Creatures=
 
O let the earth bless the Lord; *
 O ye mountains and hills, bless ye the Lord;
 
O all ye green things upon the earth, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
O all ye fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord; *
 O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the Lord;
 
O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
<page 49>
 
=IV  The People of God=
 
O ye people of God, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord;
 
O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord; *
 O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord.
 
Let us bless the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; *
 praise him and magnify him for ever.
 
 
<Canticle 2>  A Song of Praise  =Benedictus es, Domine=
 
=Song of the Three Young Men, 29-34=
 
Blessed art thou, O Lord God of our fathers; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
Blessed are thou for the name of thy Majesty; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
Blessed are thou in the temple of thy holiness; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
Blessed are thou that beholdest the depths,
and dwellest between the Cherubim; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
Blessed art thou on the glorious throne of thy kingdom; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
Blessed are thou in the firmament of heaven; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
Blessed are thou, O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; *
 praised and exalted above all for ever.
 
 
<Canticle 3>  The Song of Mary  =Magnificat=
 
=Luke 1:46-55=
 
My soul doth magnify the Lord, *
 and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.
 
For he hath regarded *
 the lowliness of his handmaiden.
 
For behold from henceforth *
 all generations shall call me blessed.
 
For he that is mighty hath magnified me, *
 and holy is his Name.
 
And his mercy is on them that fear him *
 throughout all generations.
 
He hath showed strength with his arm; *
 he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
 
He hath put down the mighty from their seat, *
 and hath exalted the humble and meek.
 
He hath filled the hungry with good things, *
 and the rich he hath sent empty away.
 
He remembering his mercy hath holpen his servant Israel, *
 as he promised to our forefathers,
 Abraham and his seed for ever.
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 4>  The Song of Zechariah  =Benedictus Dominus Deus=
 
=Luke 1:68-79=
 
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, *
 for he hath visited and redeemed his people;
 
And hath raised up a mighty salvation for us *
 in the house of his servant David,
 
As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, *
 which have been since the world began:
 
<page 51>
 
That we should be saved from our enemies, *
 and from the hand of all that hate us;
 
To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, *
 and to remember his holy covenant;
 
To perform the oath which he sware to our forefather Abraham, *
 that he would give us,
 
That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies *
 might serve him without fear,
 
In holiness and righteousness before him, *
 all the days of our life.
 
And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest, *
 for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord
/to prepare his ways;
 
To give knowledge of salvation unto his people *
 for the remission of their sins,
 
Through the tender mercy of our God, *
 whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us;
 
To give light to them that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, *
 and to guide our feet into the way of peace.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 5>  The Song of Solomon  =Nunc dimittis=
 
=Luke 2:29-32=
 
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, *
 according to thy word;
 
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, *
 which thou hast prepared before the face of all people,
 
To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, *
 and to be the glory of thy people Israel.
 
<page 51>
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 6>  Glory be to God  =Gloria in Excelsis=
 
Glory be to God on high,
 and on earth peace, good will towards mean.
 
We praise thee, we bless thee,
 we worship thee,
 we glorify thee,
 we give thanks to thee for thy great glory,
 
O Lord God, heavenly King, God the Father Almighty.
 
 
O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ;
O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,
 that takest away the sins of the world,
 have mercy upon us.
 
Thou that takest away the sins of the world,
 receive our prayer.
 
Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father,
 have mercy upon us.
 
 
For thou only art holy,
thou only art the Lord,
thou only, O Christ,
 with the Holy Ghost,
 art most high in the glory of God the Father.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 7>  We Praise Thee  =Te Deum laudamus=
 
We praise thee, O God; we acknoledge thee to be the Lord.
All the earth doth worship thee, the Father everlasting.
To thee all Angels cry aloud,
the Heavens and all the Powers therein.
To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry:
 Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth;
 Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory.
 
The glorious company of the apostles praise thee.
The goodly fellowship of the prophets praise thee.
The noble army of martyrs praise thee.
The holy Church throughout all the world
/doth acknowledge thee,
 the Father, of an infinite majesty,
 thine adorable, true, and only Son,
 also the Holy Ghost the Comforter.
 
 
Thou art the King of glory, O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man,
thou didst humble thyself to be born of a Virgin.
When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death,
thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to all believers.
Thou sittest at the right hand of God, in the glory of the Father.
We believe that thou shalt come to be our judge.
 We therefore pray thee, help thy servants,
 whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood.
 Make them to be numbered with thy saints,
 in glory everlasting.
 
 
<The Apostles' Creed>
 
*Officiant and People together, all standing*
 
I believe in God, the Father almighty,
 maker of heaven and earth;
 
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord;
 who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
 born of the Virgin Mary,
 suffered under Pontius Pilate,
 was crucified, dead, and buried.
 He descended into hell.
<page 54>
 The third day he rose again from the dead.
 He ascended into heaven,
 and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father almighty.
 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
 
I believe in the Holy Ghost,
 the holy catholic Church,
 the communion of saints,
 the forgiveness of sins,
 the resurrection of the body,
 and the life everlasting.  Amen.
 
*The text of the Creed on page 96 may be used instead.*
 
 
<The Prayers>
 
*The People stand or kneel*
 
*Officiant*  The Lord be with you.
 
*People*  And also with you.
 
*Officiant*  Let us pray.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
 on earth as it is in heaven.
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our tresspasses,
 as we forgive those
 who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
 
*Then follows one of these sets of Suffrages*
 
<Suffrages A>
 
&V.  O Lord, show thy mercy upon us;
 
&R.  And grant us thy salvation.
 
&V.  Endue thy ministers with righteousness;
 
&R.  And make thy chosen people joyful.
 
&V.  Give peace, O Lord, in all the world;
 
&R.  For only in thee can we live in safety.
 
&V.  Lord, keep this nation under thy care;
 
&R.  And guide us in the way of justice and truth.
 
&V.  Let thy way be known upon earth;
 
&R.  Thy saving health among all nations.
 
&V.  Let not the needy, O Lord, be forgotten;
 
&R.  Nor the hope of the poor be taken away.
 
&V.  Create in us clean hearts, O God;
 
&R.  And sustain us with your Holy Spirit.
 
 
<Suffrages B>
 
&V.  O Lord, save thy people and bless thine heritage;
 
&R.  Govern them and lift them up for ever.
 
&V.  Day by day we magnify thee;
 
&R.  And we worship thy name for ever, world without end.
 
&V.  Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin;
 
&R.  O Lord, have mercy upon us, hve mercy upon us.
 
&V.  O Lord, let thy mercy be upon us;
 
&R.  As our trust is in thee.
 
&V.  O Lord, in thee have I trusted;
 
&R.  Let me never be confounded.
 
 
*The Officiant then says one or more of the following Collects*
 
*The Collect of the Day*
 
<page 55>
 
 
*A Collect for Sundays*
 
O God, who makest us glad with the weekly remembrance of
the glorious resurrection of thy Son our Lord:  Grant us this
day such blessing through our worship of thee, that the days
to come may be spent in thy favor; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Fridays*
 
Almighty God, whose most dear Son went not up to joy but
first he suffered pain, and entered not into glory before he
was crucified:  Mercifully grant that we, walking in the way
of the cross, may find it none other than the way of life and
peace; through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Saturdays*
 
Almighty God, who after the creation of the world didst rest
from all thy works and sanctify a day of rest for all thy
creatures:  Grant that we, putting away all earthly anxieties,
may be duly prepared for the service of thy sanctuary, and
that our rest here upon earth may be a preparation for the
eternal rest promised to thy people in heaven; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for the Renewal of Life*
 
O God, the King eternal, who dividest the day from the
night and turnest the shadow of death into the morning:
Drive far from us all wrong desires, incline our hearts to keep
thy law, and guide our feet into the way of peace; that,
having done thy will with cheerfulness while it was day, we
may, when night cometh, rejoice to give thee thanks;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
<page 57>
 
 
*A Collect for Peace*
 
O God, who art the author of peace and lover of concord,
in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service
is perfect freedom:  Defend us, thy humble servants, in all
assaults of our enemies; that we, surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries; through
the might of Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Grace*
 
O Lord, our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God,
who hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day:
Defend us in the same with thy mighty power; and grant that
this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of
danger; but that we, being ordered by thy governance, may
do always what is righteous in thy sight; through Jesus Christ
our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Guidance*
 
O heavenly Father, in whom we live and move and have our
being:  We humbly pray thee so to guide and govern us by thy
Holy Spirit, that in all the cares and occupations of our life
we may not forget thee, but may remember that we are ever
walking in thy sight; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*Then, unless the Eucharist or a form of general intercession is to
follow, one of these prayers for mission is added*
 
Almighty and everlasting God, by whose Spirit the whole
body of thy faithful people is governed and sanctified:
Receive our supplications and prayers which we offer before
thee for all members of thy holy Church, that in their
vocation and ministry they may truly and godly serve thee;
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.  =Amen.=
 
*or the following*
 
<page 58>
 
O God, who hast made of one blood all the peoples of the
earth, and didst send thy blessed Son to preach peace to those
who are far off and to those who are near:  Grant that people
everywhere may seek after thee and find thee; bring the
nations into thy fold; pour out thy Spirit upon all flesh; and
hasten the coming of thy kingdom; through the same thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*or this*
 
Lord Jesus Christ, who didst stretch out thine arms of love
on the hard wood of the cross that everyone might come
within the reach of thy saving embrace:  So clothe us in thy
Spirit that we, reaching forth our hands in love, may bring
those who do not know thee to the knowledge and love of
you; for the honor of thy Name.  =Amen.=
 
*Here may be sung a hymn or anthem.*
 
*Authorized intercessions and thanksgivings may follow.*
 
 
*Before the close of the Office one or both of the following may be
used*
 
 
*The General Thanksgiving*
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Almighty God, Father of all mercies,
we thine unworthy servants
do give thee most humble and hearty thanks
for all thy goodness and loving-kindness
to us and to all men.
We bless thee for our creation, preservation,
and all the blessings of this life;
but above all for thine inestimable love
in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory.
<page 59>
And, we beseech thee,
give us that due sense of all thy mercies,
that our hearts may be unfaignedly thankful;
and that we show forth thy praise,
not only with our lips, but in our lives,
by giving up our selves to thy service,
and by walking before thee
in holiness and righteousness all our days;
through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom, with thee and the Holy Spirit,
be all honor and glory, world without end.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Prayer of St. Chrysostom*
 
Almighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one
accord to make our common supplication unto thee; and
hast promised through thy well-beloved Son that when two
or three are gathered together in his Name thou wilt be in the
midst of them:  Fulfill now, O Lord, our desires and petitions
of thy servants as may be best for us; granting us in this
world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life
everlasting.  =Amen.=
 
 
*Then may be said*
 
Let us bless the Lord.
=Thanks be to God.=
 
*From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost "Alleluia, alleluia" may
be added to the preceding versicle and response.*
 
 
*The Officiant may then conclude with one of the following*
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore.
=Amen.=  =2 Corinthians 13:14=
 
<page 60>
 
May the God of hope fill us with all joy and peace in
believing through the power of the Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
=Romans 15:13=
 
Glory to God whose power, working in us, can do infinitely
more than we can ask or imagine:  Glory to him from
generation to generation in the Church, and in Christ Jesus
for ever and ever.  =Amen.=  =Ephesians 3:20,21=
 
 
 
<Daily Evening Prayer:
Rite One>
 
*The Officiant begins the service with one or more of the following
sentences of Scripture, or of those on pages 37-40;*
 
*or with the Service of Light on pages 109-112, and continuing with the
appointed Psalmody;*
 
*or with the versicle "O God, make speed to save us" on page 63.
 
Let my payer be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and let
the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice.
=Psalm 141:2=
 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ.  =Philippians 1:2=
 
O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness; let the whole
earth stand in awe of him.  =Psalm 96:9=
 
Thine is the day, O God, thine also the night; thou hast
established the moon and the sun.  Thou hast fixed all the
boundries of the earth; thou hast made summer and winter.
=Psalm 74:15,16=
 
I will bless the Lord, who giveth me counsel; my heart
teacheth me, night after night.  I have set the Lord always
before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not fall.
=Psalm 16:7,8=
 
<page 62>
 
Seek him that made the Pleides and Orion, that turneth deep
darkness into the morning, and darkeneth the day into night;
that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out
upon the face of the earth:  The Lord is his Name.  =Amos 5:8=
 
If I say, "Surely the darkness will cover me, and the light
around me turn to night," darkness is not dark to thee, O Lord;
the night is as bright as the day; darkness and light to thee
are both alike.  =Psalm 139:10,11=
 
Jesus said, "I am the light of the world; he that followeth me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life."
=John 8:12=
 
 
*The following Confession of Sin may then be said; or the Office may
continue at once with "O God make speed to save us."
 
 
<Confession of Sin>
 
*The Officiant says to the people*
 
Dear friends in Christ, here in the presence of Almighty God,
let us kneel in silence, and with penitent and obedient hearts
confess our sins, so that we may obtain forgiveness by his
infinite goodness and mercy.
 
*or this*
 
Let us humbly confess our sins unto Almighty God.
 
*Silence may be kept.*
 
*Officiant and People together, all kneeling*
 
Almighty and most merciful Father,
we have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep,
we have followed too much the devices and desires of our
/own hearts,
we have offended against thy holy laws,
we have left undone those things which we ought to
/have done,
and we have done those things which we ought not to
/have done.
But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us,
spare thou those who confess their faults,
restore thou those who are penitent,
according to thy promises declared unto mankind
in Christ Jesus our Lord;
and grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake,
that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life,
to the glory of thy holy Name.  Amen.
 
 
*The Priest alone stands and says*
 
The Almighty and merciful Lord grant you absolution and
remission of all your sins, true repentance, amendment of
life, and the grace and consolation of his Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
 
*A deacon or lay person using the preceding form remains kneeling, and
substitutes "us" for "you" and "our" for "your."
 
 
<The Invitatory and Psalter>
 
*All stand*
 
*Officiant*  O God, make speed to save us.
 
*People*  O Lord, make haste to help us.
 
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:  as
it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*Except in Lent,*  Alleluia *may be added.*
 
<page 64>
 
*The following, or some other suitable hymn, or an Invitatory Psalm, may
be sung or said*
 
 
<O Gracious Light>  =Phos hilaron=
 
O gracious Light,
pure brightness of the everliving Father in heaven,
O Jesus Christ, holy and blessed!
 
Now as we come to the setting of the sun,
and our eyes behold the vesper light,
we sing thy praises, O God:  Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
 
Thou art worthy at all times to be praised by happy voices,
O Son of God, O Giver of life,
and to be glorified though all the worlds.
 
*then follows*
 
 
<The Psalm or Psalms Appointed>
 
*At the end of the Psalms is sung or said*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<The Lessons>
 
*One or two lessons, as appointed, are read, the Reader first saying*
 
A Reading (Lesson) from &mdash..
 
*A citation giving chapter and verse may be added.*
 
<page 65>
 
*After each Lesson the Reader may say*
 
The Word of the Lord.
 
*Answer* Thanks be to God.
 
*Or the Reader may say* Here endeth the Lesson (Reading).
 
*Silence may be kept after each Reading.  One of the following
Canticles, or one of those on pages 47-52, or 85-95, is sung or said
after each Reading.  If three Lessons are used, the Lesson from the
Gospel is read after the second Canticle.*
 
 
<The Song of Mary>  =Magnificat=
=Luke 1:46-55=
 
My soul doth magnify the Lord, *
 and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.
 
For he hath regarded *
 the lowliness of his handmaiden.
 
For behold from henceforth *
 all generations shall call me blessed.
 
For he that is mighty hath magnified me, *
 and holy is his Name.
 
And his mercy is on them that fear him *
 throughout all generations.
 
He hath showed strength with his arm; *
 he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
 
He hath put down the mighty from their seat, *
 and hath exalted the humble and meek.
 
He hath filled the hungry with good things, *
 and the rich he hath sent empty away.
 
He remembering his mercy hath holpen his servant Israel, *
 as he promised to our forefathers,
 Abraham and his seed for ever.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
<page 66>
 
 
<The Song of Solomon>  =Nunc dimittis=
=Luke 2:29-32=
 
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, *
 according to thy word;
 
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, *
 which thou hast prepared before the face of all people,
 
To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, *
 and to be the glory of thy people Israel.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<The Apostle's Creed>
 
*Officiant and People together, all standing*
 
I believe in God, the Father almighty,
 maker of heaven and earth;
 
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord;
 who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
 born of the Virgin Mary,
 suffered under Pontius Pilate,
 was crucified, dead, and buried.
 He descended into hell.
 The third day he rose again from the dead.
 He ascended into heaven,
 and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father almighty.
 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
 
I believe in the Holy Ghost,
 the holy catholic Church,
 the communion of saints,
 the forgiveness of sins,
 the resurrection of the body,
 and the life everlasting.  Amen.
 
*The text of the Creed on page 96 may be used instead.*
 
<page 67>
 
 
<The Prayers>
 
*The People stand or kneel*
 
*Officiant*  The Lord be with you.
 
*People*  And also with you.
 
*Officiant*  Let us pray.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
 on earth as it is in heaven.
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our tresspasses,
 as we forgive those
 who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
 
*Then follows one of these sets of Suffrages*
 
 
<Suffrages A>
 
&V.  O Lord, show thy mercy upon us;
 
&R.  And grant us thy salvation.
 
&V.  Endue thy ministers with righteousness;
 
&R.  And make thy chosen people joyful.
 
&V.  Give peace, O Lord, in all the world;
 
&R.  For only in thee can we live in safety.
 
&V.  Lord, keep this nation under thy care;
 
&R.  And guide us in the way of justice and truth.
 
<page 68>
 
&V.  Let thy way be known upon earth;
 
&R.  Thy saving health among all nations.
 
&V.  Let not the needy, O Lord, be forgotten;
 
&R.  Nor the hope of the poor be taken away.
 
&V.  Create in us clean hearts, O God;
 
&R.  And sustain us with your Holy Spirit.
 
 
<Suffrages B>
 
That this evening may be holy, good, and peaceful,
=We entreat thee, O Lord.=
 
That thy holy angels may lead us in paths of peace and
goodwill,
=We entreat thee, O Lord.=
 
That we may be pardoned and forgiven for our sins
and offenses,
=We entreat thee, O Lord.=
 
That there may be peace to thy Church and to the whole
world,
=We entreat thee, O Lord.=
 
That we may depart this life in thy faith and fear, and
not be condemned before the great judgment seat
of Christ,
=We entreat thee, O Lord.=
 
That we may be bound together by thy Holy Spirit in
the communion of [&mdash. and] all thy saints,
entrusting one another and all our life to Christ,
=We entreat thee, O Lord.=
 
 
*The Officiant then says one or more of the following Collects*
 
*The Collect of the Day*
 
<page 69>
 
*A Collect for Sundays*
 
Lord God, whose Son our Savior Jesus Christ triumphed
over the powers of death and prepared for us our place in the
new Jerusalem:  Grant that we, who have this day given
thanks for his resurrection, may praise thee in that City of
which he is the light; and where he liveth and reigneth for ever
and ever.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Fridays*
 
O Lord Jesus Christ, who by thy death didst take away the
sting of death:  Grant unto us thy servants so to follow in
faith where thou hast led the way, that we may at length fall
asleep peacefully in thee, and awake up after thy likeness; for
thy tender mercies' sake.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Saturdays*
 
O God, the source of eternal light:  Shed forth thine unending
day upon us who watch for thee, that our lips may praise thee,
our lives may bless thee, and our worship on the morrow may
give thee glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Peace*
 
O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and
all just works do proceed:  Give unto thy servants that peace
which the world cannot give, that our hearts may be set to
obey thy commandments, and also that by thee, we, being
defended from the fear of all enemies, may pass our time in
rest and quietness; through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior.  =Amen.=
 
<page 70>
 
 
*A Collect for Aid against Perils*
 
Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord; and by thy
great mercy defend us from all perils
 
 
 
 
 
*Then, unless the Eucharist or a form of general intercession is to
follow, one of these prayers for mission is added*
 
 
 
*Here may be sung a hymn or anthem.*
 
*Authorized intercessions and thanksgivings may follow.*
 
 
*Before the close of the Office one or both of the following may be
used*
 
 
*The General Thanksgiving*
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Almighty God, Father of all mercies,
we thine unworthy servants
do give thee most humble and hearty thanks
for all thy goodness and loving-kindness
to us and to all men.
We bless thee for our creation, preservation,
and all the blessings of this life;
but above all for thine inestimable love
in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory.
And, we beseech thee,
give us that due sense of all thy mercies,
that our hearts may be unfaignedly thankful;
<page 72>
and that we show forth thy praise,
not only with our lips, but in our lives,
by giving up our selves to thy service,
and by walking before thee
in holiness and righteousness all our days;
through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom, with thee and the Holy Spirit,
be all honor and glory, world without end.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Prayer of St. Chrysostom*
 
Almighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one
accord to make our common supplication unto thee; and
hast promised through thy well-beloved Son that when two
or three are gathered together in his Name thou wilt be in the
midst of them:  Fulfill now, O Lord, our desires and petitions
of thy servants as may be best for us; granting us in this
world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life
everlasting.  =Amen.=
 
 
*Then may be said*
 
Let us bless the Lord.
=Thanks be to God.=
 
*From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost "Alleluia, alleluia" may
be added to the preceding versicle and response.*
 
 
*The Officiant may then conclude with one of the following*
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore.
=Amen.=  =2 Corinthians 13:14=
 
<page 73>
 
May the God of hope fill us with all joy and peace in
believing through the power of the Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
=Romans 15:13=
 
Glory to God whose power, working in us, can do infinitely
more than we can ask or imagine:  Glory to him from
generation to generation in the Church, and in Christ Jesus
for ever and ever.  =Amen.=  =Ephesians 3:20,21=
 
<page 74>
 
*Concerning the Service*
 
*In the Daily Office, the term "Officiant" is used to denote the person,
clerical or lay, who leads the Office.*
 
*It is appropriate that other persons be assigned to read the Lessons,
and to lead other parts of the service not assigned to the officiant.
The bishop, when present, appropriately concludes the Office with a
blessing.*
 
*At celebrations of the Holy Eucharist, the Order for Morning or Evening
Prayer may be used in place of all that precedes the Offeratory.*
 
*Additional Directions are on page 141.*
 
<page 75>
 
 
 
<Daily Morning Prayer:
Rite Two>
 
*The Officiant begins the service with one or more of these sentences of
Scripture, or with the versicle "Lord, open our lips" on page 80.*
 
 
=Advent=
 
Watch, for you do not know when the master of the house
will come, in the evening, or at midnight, or at cockcrow, or
in the morning, lest he come suddenly and find you asleep.
=Mark 13:35, 36=
 
In the wilderness prepare the way of the Lord, make straight
in the desert a highway for our God.  =Isaiah 40:3=
 
The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
it together.  =Isaiah 40:5=
 
 
=Christmas=
 
Behold, I bring you good news of a great joy which will come
to all the people; for to you is born this day in the city of
David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.  =Luke 2:10, 11=
 
Behold, the dwelling of God is with mankind.  He will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will
be with them, and be their God.  =Revelation 21:3=
 
<page 76>
 
 
=Epiphany=
 
Nations shall come to your light, and kings to the brightness
of your rising.  =Isaiah 60:3=
 
I will give you as a light to the nations, that my salvation may
reach to the end of the earth.  =Isaiah 49:6b=
 
From the rising of the sun to its setting my Name shall be great
among the nations, and in every place incense shall be offered
to my Name, and a pure offering; for my Name shall be great
among the nations, says the Lord of hosts.  =Malachi 1:11=
 
 
=Lent=
 
If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
is not in us, but if we confess our sins, God, who is faithful
and just, will forgive our sins and cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.  =1 John 1:8, 9=
 
Rend your hearts and not your garments.  Return to the Lord
your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and
abounding in steadfast love, and repents of evil.  =Joel 2:13=
 
I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him,
"Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you; I am
no longer worthy to be called your son."  =Luke 15:18, 19=
 
To the Lord our God belong mercy and forgiveness, because
we have rebelled against him and have not obeyed the voice
of the Lord our God by following his laws which he set
before us.  =Daniel 9:9, 10=
 
Jesus said, "If anyone would come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his cross and follow me."  =Mark 8:34=
 
 
=Holy Week=
 
All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one
<page 77>
to his own way; and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all.  =Isaiah 53:6=
 
Is it nothing to you, all you who pass by?  Look and see if
there is any sorrow like my sorrow which was brought upon
me, whom the Lord has afflicted.  =Lamentations 1:12=
 
 
=Easter Season, including Ascension Day
and the Day of Pentecost=
 
Alleluia! Christ is risen.
=The Lord is risen indeed. Alleluia!=
 
On this day the Lord has acted; we will rejoice and be glad in
it.  =Psalm 118:24=
 
Thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.  =1 Corinthians 15:57=
 
If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things that
are above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.
=Colossians 3:1=
 
Christ has entered, not into a sanctuary made with hands, a
copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear in
the presence of God on our behalf.  =Hebrews 9:24=
 
You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon
you; and you shall be my witness in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.  =Acts 1:8=
 
 
=Trinity Sunday=
 
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, who was, and is,
and is to come!  =Revelation 4:8=
 
 
=All Saints and other Major Saints' Days=
 
We give thanks to the Father, who has made us worthy to
share in the inheritance of the saints in light.  =Colossians 1:12=
 
<page 78>
 
You are no longer strangers and sojourners, but fellow
citizens with the saints and members of the household of
God.  =Ephesians 2:19=
 
Their sound has gone out into all lands, and their message to
the ends of the world.  =Psalm 19:4=
 
 
=Occasions of Thanksgiving=
 
Give thanks to the Lord, and call upon his Name; make
known his deeds among the peoples.  =Psalm 105:1=
 
 
=At any Time=
 
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ.  =Philippians 1:2=
 
I was glad when they said to me, "Let us go to the house of
the Lord."  =Psalm 122:1=
 
Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart
be acceptable in you sight, O Lord, my strength and my
redeemer.  =Psalm 19:14=
 
Send out your light and your truth, that they may lead me,
and bring me to your holy hill and to your dwelling.
=Psalm 43:3=
 
The Lord is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence
before him.  =Habakkuk 2:20=
 
The hour is coming, and now is, when the true worshipers
will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for such the
Father seeks to worship him.  =John 4:23=
 
Thus says the high and lofty One who inhabits eternity,
whose name is Holy, "I dwell in the high and holy place and
also with the one who has a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble and to revive the heart of the
contrite."  =Isaiah 57:15=
 
<page 79>
 
*The following Confession of Sin may then be said; or the Office may
continue at once with "Lord, open our lips."
 
 
<Confession of Sin>
 
*The Officiant says to the people*
 
Dearly beloved, we have come together in the presence of
Almighty God our heavenly Father, to set forth his praise, to
hear his holy Word, and to ask, for ourselves and on behalf
of others, those things that are necessary for our life and our
salvation.  And so that we may prepare ourselves in heart and
mind to worship him, let us kneel in silence, and with
penitent and obedient hearts confess our sins, that we may
obtain forgiveness by his infinite goodness and mercy.
 
*or this*
 
Let us confess our sins against God and our neighbor.
 
*Silence may be kept.*
 
*Officiant and People together, all kneeling*
 
Most merciful God,
we confess that we have sinned against you
in thought, word, and deed,
by what we have done,
and by what we have left undone.
We have not loved you with our whole heart;
we have not loved our neighbors as ourselves.
We are truly sorry and we humbly repent.
For the sake of your Son Jesus Christ,
have mercy on us and forgive us;
that we may delight in your will,
and walk in your ways,
to the glory of your Name.  Amen.
 
<page 80>
 
*The Priest stands and says*
 
Almighty God have mercy on you, forgive you all your sins
through our Lord Jesus Christ, strengthen you in all
goodness, and by the power of the Holy Spirit keep you in
eternal life.  =Amen.=
 
*A deacon or lay person using the preceding form remains kneeling, and
substitutes "us" for "you" and "our" for "your."
 
 
<The Invitatory and Psalter>
 
*All stand*
 
*Officiant* Lord, open our lips.
*People*  And our mouth shall proclaim your praise.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: as
it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*Except in Lent, add*  Alleluia.
 
 
*Then follows one of the Invitatory Psalms, Venite or Jubilate.*
 
*One of the following Antiphons may be sung or said with the Invitatory
Psalm*
 
 
*In Advent*
 
Our King and Savior now draws near:  Come let us adore him.
 
 
*On the Twelve Days of Christmas*
 
Alleluia.  To us a child is born:  Come let us adore him.  Alleluia.
 
<page 81>
 
*From the Epiphany through the Baptism of Christ, and on the Feasts of
the Transfiguration and Holy Cross*
 
The Lord has shown forth his glory:  Come let us adore him.
 
 
*In Lent*
 
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy:  Come let us
adore him.
 
 
*From Easter Day until the Ascension*
 
Alleluia.  The Lord is risen indeed:  Come let us adore him.
Alleluia.
 
 
*From Ascension Day until the Day of Pentecost*
 
Alleluia.  Christ has ascended into heaven:  Come let us adore him.
Alleluia.
 
 
*On the Day of Pentecost*
 
Alleluia.  The Spirit of the Lord renews the face of the earth:
Come let us adore him.  Alleluia.
 
 
*On Trinity Sunday*
 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one God:  Come let us adore him.
 
 
*On other Sundays and weekdays*
 
The earth is the Lord's for he made it:  Come let us adore him.
 
*or this*
 
Worship the Lord in the beauty of his holiness:  Come let us
adore him.
 
*or this*
 
The mercy of the Lord is everlasting:  Come let us adore him.
 
<page 82>
 
*The Alleluias in the following Antiphons are used only in Easter
Season.*
 
 
*On Feasts of the Incarnation*
 
[Alleluia] The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us:
Come let us adore him. [Alleluia]
 
 
*On all Saints and other Major Saints' Days*
 
[Alleluia.]  The Lord is glorious in his saints:  Come let us
adore him.  [Alleluia.]
 
 
<Venite>  =Psalm 95:1-7=
 
Come let us sing to the Lord; *
 let us shout for joy to the Rock of our salvation.
 
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving *
 and raise a loud shout to him with psalms.
 
 
For the Lord is a great God, *
 and a great King above all gods.
 
In his hand are the caverns of the earth, *
 and the heights of the hills are his also.
 
The sea is his, for he made it, *
 and his hands have molded the dry land.
 
 
Come, let us bow down, and bend the knee, *
 and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
 
For he is our God,
and we are the people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand. *
 Oh, that today you would hearken to his voice!
 
*or Psalm 95, page 724.*
 
 
<Jubilate>  =Psalm 100=
 
Be joyful in the Lord, all you lands; *
 serve the Lord with gladness
 and come before his presence with song.
 
<page 83>
 
Know this:  The Lord himself is God; *
 he himself has made us, and we are his;
 we are his people and the sheep of his pasture.
 
Enter his gates with thanksgiving;
go into his courts with praise; *
 give thanks to him and call upon his Name.
 
For the Lord is good;
his mercy is everlasting; *
 and his faithfulness endures from age to age.
 
*In Easter Week, in place of an Invitatory Psalm, the following is sung
or said.  It may also be used daily until the Day of Pentecost.*
 
 
<Christ our Passover>  =Pascha nostrum=
 
=1 Corinthians 5:7-8; Romans 6:9-11; 1 Corinthians 15:20-22=
 
Alleluia.
Christ our Passover has been sacrificed for us; *
 therfore let us keep the feast,
 
Not with the old leaven, the leaven of malice and evil, *
 but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.  Alleluia.
 
 
Christ being raised from the dead will never die again; *
 death no longer has dominion over him.
 
The death that he died, he died to sin, once for all; *
 but the life he lives, he lives to God.
 
So also consider yourselves dead to sin, *
 and alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord.  Alleluia.
 
 
Christ has been raised from the dead, *
 the first fruits of those who have fallen asleep.
 
For since by a man came death, *
 by a man has come also the resurrection of the dead.
 
For as in Adam all die, *
 so also in Christ shall all be made alive.  Alleluia.
 
<page 84>
 
*Then follows*
 
<The Psalm or Psalms Appointed>
 
*At the end of the Psalms is sung or said*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<The Lessons>
 
*One or two lessons, as appointed, are read, the Reader first saying
 
A Reading (Lesson) from &mdash..
 
*A citation giving chapter and verse may be added.*
 
 
*After each Lesson the Reader may say*
 
The Word of the Lord.
 
*Answer* Thanks be to God.
 
*Or the Reader may say* Here ends the Lesson (Reading).
 
 
*silence may be kept after each Reading.  One of the following
Canticles, or one of those on pages 47-52 (Canticles 1-7), is sung or
said after each Reading.  If three lessons are used, the Lesson from the
Gospel is read after the second Canticle.*
 
<page 85>
 
 
<8 The Song of Moses>  =Cantemus Domino=
 
=Exodus 15:1-6, 11-13, 17-18=
 
*Especially suitable for use in Easter Season*
 
I will sing to the Lord, for he is lofty and uplifted; *
 the horse and its rider has he hurled into the sea.
 
The Lord is my strength and my refuge; *
 the Lord has become my Savior.
 
This is my God and I will praise him, *
 the God of my people and I will exalt him.
 
The Lord is a mighty warrior; *
 Yahweh is his Name.
 
The chariots of Pharoah and his army has he hurled into the sea; *
 the finest of those who bear armor have been
/drowned in the Red Sea.
 
The fathomless deep has overwhelmed them; *
 they sank into the depths like a stone.
 
Your right hand, O Lord, is glorious in might; *
 your right hand, O Lord, has overthrown the enemy.
 
Who can be compared with you, O Lord, among the gods? *
 who is like you, glorious in holiness,
 awesome in renown, and worker of wonders?
 
You stretched forth your right hand; *
 the earth swallowed them up.
 
With your constant love you led the people you redeemed; *
 with your might you brought them in safety to
/your holy dwelling.
 
You will bring them in and plant them *
 on the mount of your possession,
 
The resting-place you have made for yourself, O Lord, *
 the sanctuary, O Lord, that your hand has established.
 
The Lord shall reign *
 for ever and for ever.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
<page 86>
 
 
<Canticle 9> The First Song of Isaiah  =Ecce, Deus=
 
=Isaiah 12:2-6=
 
Surely, it is God who saves me; *
 I will trust in him and not be afraid.
 
For the Lord is my stronghold and my sure defense, *
 and he will be my Savior.
 
Therefore you shall draw water with rejoicing *
 from the springs of salvation.
 
And on that day you shall say, *
 Give thanks to the Lord and call upon his Name;
 
Make his deeds known among the peoples; *
 see that they remember that his Name is exalted.
 
Sing praises of the Lord, for he has done great things, *
 and this is known in all the world.
 
Cry aloud, inhabitants of Zion, ring out your joy, *
 for the great one in the midst of you is the Holy One of Israel.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 10>  The Second Song of Isaiah =Quaerite Dominum=
 
=Isaiah 55:6-11=
 
Seek the Lord while he wills to be found; *
 call upon him when he draws near.
 
Let the wicked forsake their ways *
 and the evil ones their thoughts;
 
And let them turn to the Lord, and he will have compassion, *
 and to our God, for he will richly pardon.
 
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, *
 nor your ways my ways, says the Lord.
 
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, *
 so are my ways higher than your ways,
 and my thoughts than your thoughts.
 
<page 87>
 
For as rain and snow fall from the heavens *
 and return not again, but water the earth,
 
Bringing forth life and giving growth, *
 seed for sowing and bread for eating,
 
So is my word that goes forth from my mouth; *
 it will not return to me empty;
 
But it will accomplish that which I have purposed, *
 and prosper in that for which I sent it.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
<Canticle 11>  The Third Song of Isaiah  =Surge, illuminare=
 
=Isaiah 60:1-3, 11a, 14c, 18-19=
 
Arise, shine, for your light has come, *
 and the glory of the Lord has dawned upon you.
 
For behold, darkness covers the land; *
 deep gloom enshrouds the peoples.
 
But over you the Lord will rise, *
 and his glory will appear upon you.
 
Nations will stream to your light, *
 and kings to the brightness of your dawning.
 
Your gates will always be open; *
 by day or night they will never be shut.
 
They will call you, The City of the Lord, *
 The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
 
Violence will no more be heard in your land, *
 ruin or destruction within your borders.
 
You will call your walls, Salvation, *
 and all your portals, Praise.
 
The sun will no more be your light by day; *
 by night you will not need the brightness of the moon.
 
<page 88>
 
The Lord will be your everlasting light, *
 and your God will be your glory.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 12>  A Song of Creation  =Benedicite, omnia opera Domini=
 
=Song of the Three Young Men, 35-65=
 
*One or more sections of this Canticle may be used.  Whatever the
selection, it begins with the Invocation and concludes with the
Doxology.*
 
=Invocation=
 
Glorify the Lord, all you works of the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
In the firmament of his power, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
=I  The Cosmic Order=
 
Glorify the Lord, you angels and all powers of the Lord, *
 O heavens and all waters above the heavens.
 
Sun and moon and stars of the sky, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
Glorify the Lord, every shower of rain and fall of dew, *
 all winds and fire and heat.
 
Winter and Summer, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
Glorify the Lord, O chill and cold, *
 drops of dew and flakes of snow>
 
Frost and cold, ice and sleet, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
Glorify the Lord, O nights and days, *
 O shining light and enfolding dark.
 
Storm clouds and thunderbolts, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
=II  The Earth and its Creatures=
 
Let the earth glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
Glorify the Lord, O mountains and hills,
and all that grows upon the earth, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
Glorify the Lord, O springs of water, seas, and streams, *
 O whales and all that move in the waters.
 
All birds of the air, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
Glorify the Lord, O beasts of the wild, *
 and all you flocks and herds.
 
O men and women everywhere, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
=III  The People of God=
 
Let the people of God glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
Glorify the Lord, O priests and servants of the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
Glorify the Lord, O spirits and souls of the righteous, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
You that are holy and humble of heart, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
<page 90>
 
=Doxology=
 
Let us glorify the Lord:  Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
In the firmament of his power, glorify the Lord, *
 praise him and highly exalt him for ever.
 
 
<Canticle 13>  =Benedictus es, Domine=
 
=Song of the Three Young Men, 29-34=
 
Glory to you, Lord God of our fathers; *
 you are worthy of praise; glory to you.
 
Glory to you for the radiance of you holy Name; *
 we will praise you and highly exalt you for ever.
 
 
Glory to you in the splendor of you temple; *
 on the throne of your majesty, glory to you.
 
Glory to you, seated between the Cherubim; *
 we will praise you and highly exalt you for ever.
 
 
Glory to you, beholding the depths; *
 in the high vault of heaven, glory to you.
 
Glory to you, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; *
 we will praise you and highly exalt you for ever.
 
 
<Canticle 14>  A Song of Penitence  =Kyrie Pantokrator=
 
=Prayer of Manasseh 1-2, 4, 6-7, 11-15=
 
*Especially suitable in Lent, and on other penitential occasions*
 
O Lord and Ruler of the hosts of heaven, *
 God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
 and of all their righteous offspring:
 
You made the heavens and the earth, *
 with all their vast array.
 
<page 91>
 
All things quake with fear at your presence; *
 they tremble because of your power.
 
But your merciful promise is beyond all measure; *
 it surpasses all that our minds can fathom.
 
O Lord, you are full of compassion, *
 long-suffering, and abounding in mercy.
 
You hold back your hand; *
 you do not punish as we deserve.
 
In your great goodness, Lord,
you have promised forgiveness to sinners, *
 that they may repent of their sin and be saved.
 
And now, O Lord, I bend the knee of my heart, *
 and make my appeal, sure of your gracious goodness.
 
I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, *
 and I know my wickedness only too well.
 
Therefore I make this prayer to you: *
 Forgive me, Lord, forgive me.
 
Do not let me perish in my sin, *
 nor condemn me to the depths of the earth.
 
For you, O Lord, are the God of those who repent, *
 and in me you will show forth your goodness.
 
Unworthy as I am, you will save me,
in accordance with your great mercy, *
 and I will praise you without ceasing all the days of my life.
 
For all the powers of heaven sing your praises, *
 and yours is the glory to ages of ages.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 15>  The Song of Mary  =Magnificat=
 
=Luke 1:46-55=
 
My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord,
my spirit rejoices in God my Savior; *
 for he has looked with favor on his lowly servant.
 
<page 92>
 
From this day all generations will call me blessed: *
 the Almighty has done great things for me,
 and holy is his Name.
 
He has mercy on those who fear him *
 in every generation.
 
He has shown the strength of his arm, *
 he has scattered the proud in their conceit.
 
He has cast down the mighty from their thrones, *
 and has lifted up the lowly.
 
He has filled the hungry with good things, *
 and the rich he has sent away empty.
 
He has come to the help of his servant Israel, *
 for he has remembered his promise of mercy,
 
The promise he made to our fathers, *
 to Abraham and his children for ever.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 16>  The Song of Zechariah  =Benedictus Dominus Deus=
 
=Luke 1: 68-79=
 
Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel; *
 he has come to his people and set them free.
 
He has raised up for us a mighty savior, *
 born of the house of his servant David.
 
Through his holy prophets he promised of old,
that he would save us from our enemies, *
 from the hands of all who hate us.
 
He promised to show mercy to our fathers *
 and to remember his holy covenant.
 
This was the oath he swore to our father Abraham, *
 to set us free from the hands of our enemies,
 
Free to worship him without fear, *
 holy and righteous in his sight
 all the days of our life.
 
<page 93>
 
You, my child, shall be called the prophet of the Most High, *
 for you will go before the Lord to prepare his way,
 
To give his people knowledge of salvation *
 by the forgiveness of their sins.
 
In the tender compassion of our God *
 the dawn from on high shall break upon us,
 
To shine on those who dwell in darkness and the shadow of death, *
and to guide our feet into the way of peace.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 17>  The Song of Simeon  =Nunc Dimittis=
 
=Luke 2:29-32=
 
Lord, you now have set your servant free *
 to go in peace as you have promised;
 
For these eyes of mine have seen the Savior, *
 whom you have prepared for all the world to see:
 
A Light to enlighten the nations, *
 and the glory of your people Israel.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 18>  A Song to the Lamb  =Dignus es=
 
=Revelation 4:11, 5:9-10, 13=
 
Splendor and honor and kingly power *
 are yours by right, O Lord our God,
 
For you created everything that is, *
 and by your will they were created and have their being;
 
<page 94>
 
And yours by right, O Lamb that was slain, *
 for with your blood you have redeemed for God,
 
From every family, language, people, and nation, *
 a kingdom of priests to serve our God.
 
 
And so, to him who sits upon the throne, *
 and to Christ the Lamb,
 
Be worship and praise, dominion and splendor, *
 for ever and for evermore.
 
 
<Canticle 19>  The Song of the Redeemed  =Magna et mirabilia=
 
=Revelation 15:3-4=
 
O ruler of the universe, Lord God,
great deeds are they that you have done, *
 surpassing human understanding.
 
Your ways are ways of righteousness and truth, *
 O King of all the ages.
 
 
Who can fail to do you homage, Lord,
and sing the praises of your Name? *
 for you only are the Holy One.
 
All nations will draw near and fall down before you, *
 because your just and holy works have been revealed.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 20>  Glory to God  =Gloria in excelsis=
 
Glory to God in the highest,
 and peace to his people on earth.
 
Lord God, heavenly King,
almighty God and Father,
<page 95>
 we worship you, we give you thanks,
 we praise you for your glory.
 
Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father,
Lord God, Lamb of God,
you take away the sin of the world:
 have mercy on us;
 
you are seated at the right hand of the Father:
 receive our prayer.
 
For you alone are the Holy One,
you alone are the Lord,
you alone are the Most High,
 Jesus Christ,
 with the Holy Spirit,
 in the glory of God the Father.  Amen.
 
 
<Canticle 21>  You are God  =Te Deum laudamus=
 
You are God:  we praise you;
You are the Lord; we acclaim you;
You are the eternal Father:
All creation worships you.
To you all angels, all the powers of heaven,
Cherubim and Seraphim, sing in endless praise:
 Holy, holy, holy Lord, God of power and might,
 heaven and earth are full of your glory.
 
The glorious company of apostles praise you.
The noble fellowship of prophets praise you.
The white-robed army of martyrs praise you.
Throughout the world the holy Church acclaims you;
 Father, of majesty unbounded,
 your true and only Son, worthy of all worship,
 and the Holy Spirit, advocate and guide.
 
<page 96>
 
You, Christ, are the king of glory,
the eternal Son of the Father.
When you became man to set us free
you did not shun the Virgin's womb.
You overcame the sting of death
and opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers.
You are seated at God's right hand in glory.
We believe that you will come and be our judge.
 Come then, Lord, and help your people,
 bought with the price of your own blood,
 and bring us with your saints
 to glory everlasting.
 
<The Apostles' Creed>
 
*Officiant and People together, all standing*
 
I believe in God, the Father almighty,
 creator of heaven and earth.
 
I believe in Jesus Christ, his only son, our Lord.
 He was conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit
/and born of the Virgin Mary.
 He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
/was crucified, died, and was buried.
 He descended to the dead.
 On the third day he rose again.
 He ascended into heaven,
/and is seated at the right hand of the Father.
 He will come again to judge the living and the dead.
 
I believe in the Holy Spirit,
 the holy catholic Church,
 the communion of saints,
 the forgiveness of sins,
 the resurrection of the body,
 and the life everlasting.  Amen.
 
<page 97>
 
<The Prayers>
 
*The People stand or kneel*
 
*Officiant*  The Lord be with you.
 
*People*  And also with you.
 
*Officiant*  Let us pray.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
/on earth as it is in heaven.
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
 as we forgive those
/who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
<parallel column>
 
Our Father in heaven,
 hallowed be you Name,
 your kingdom come,
 your will be done,
/on earth as in heaven.
 
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
 as we forgive those
/who sin against us.
 
Save us from the time of trial,
 and deliver us from evil.
 
For the kingdom, the power,
 and the glory are yours,
 now and for ever.  Amen.
 
*Then follows one of these sets of Suffrages*
 
<Suffrages A>
 
&V.  Show us your mercy, O Lord;
 
&R.  And grant us your salvation.
 
&V.  Clothe your ministers with righteousness;
 
&R.  Let your people sing with joy.
 
&V.  Give peace, O Lord, in all the world;
 
&R.  For only in you can we live in safety.
 
<page 98>
 
&V.  Lord, keep this nation under your care;
 
&R.  And guide us in the way of justice and truth.
 
&V.  Let your way be known upon earth;
 
&R.  Your saving health among all nations.
 
&V.  Let not the needy, O Lord, be forgotten;
 
&R.  Nor the hope of the poor be taken away.
 
&V.  Create in us clean hearts, O God;
 
&R.  And sustain us by your Holy Spirit.
 
<Suffrages B>
 
&V.  Save your people, Lord, and bless your inheritance;
 
&R.  Govern and uphold them, now and always.
 
&V.  Day by day we bless you;
 
&R.  We praise your name for ever.
 
&V.  Lord, keep us from all sin today;
 
&R.  Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy.
 
&V.  Lord, show us your love and mercy;
 
&R.  For we put our trust in you.
 
&V.  In you, Lord, is our hope;
 
&R.  And we shall never hope in vain.
 
*The Officiant then says one or more of the following Collects*
 
*The Collect of the Day*
 
*A Collect for Sundays*
 
O God, you make us glad with the weekly remembrance of
the glorious resurrection of you Son our Lord:  Give us this
day such blessing through our worship of you, that the week
to come may be spent in your favor; through Jesus Christ our
Lord.  =Amen.=
 
<page 99>
 
*A Collect for Fridays*
 
Almighty God, whose most dear Son went not up to joy but
first he suffered pain, and entered not into glory before he
was crucified:  Mercifully grant that we, walking in the way
of the cross, may find it none other than the way of life and
peace; through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*A Collect for Saturdays*
 
Almighty God, who after the creation of the world rested
from all you works and sanctified a day of rest for all your
creatures:  Grant that we, putting away all earthly anxieties,
may be duly prepared for the service of your sanctuary, and
that our rest here upon earth may be a preparation for the
eternal rest promised to your people in heaven; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*A Collect for the Renewal of Life*
 
O God, the King eternal, whose light divides the day from the
night and turns the shadow of death into the morning:  Drive
far from us all wrong desires, incline our hearts to keep your
law, and guide our feet into the way of peace; that, having
done your will with cheerfulness during the day, we may,
when night comes, rejoice to give you thanks; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*A Collect for Peace*
 
O God, the author of peace and lover of concord, to know
you is eternal life and to serve you is perfect freedom:  Defend
us, your humble servants, in all assaults of our enemies; that
we, surely trusting in your defense, may not fear the power of
any adversaries; through the might of Jesus Christ our Lord,
=Amen.=
 
<page 100>
 
*A Collect for Grace*
 
Lord God, almighty and everlasting Father, you have
brought us in safety to this new day:  Preserve us with your
mighty power, that we may not fall into sin, nor be overcome
by adversity; and in all we do, direct us to the fulfilling of
your purpose; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*A Collect for Guidance*
 
Heavenly Father, in you we live and move and have our
being:  We humbly pray you so to guide and govern us by
your Holy Spirit, that in all the cares and occupations of our
life we may not forget you, but may remember that we are
ever walking in your sight; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
=Amen.=
 
*Then, unless the Eucharist or a form of general intercession is to
follow, one of these prayer for mission is added*
 
Almighty and everlasting God, by whose Spirit the whole
body of your faithful people is governed and sanctified:
Receive our supplications and prayers which we offer before
your for all members of you holy Church, that in their
vocation and ministry they may truly and devoutly serve you;
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.  =Amen.=
 
*or this*
 
O God, you have made of one blood all the peoples of the
earth, and sent your blessed Son to preach peace to those
who are far off and to those who are near:  Grant that people
everywhere may seek after you and find you; bring the
nations into your fold; pour out your Spirit upon all flesh,
and hasten the coming of your kingdom; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*or the following*
 
<page 101>
 
Lord Jesus Christ, you stretched out your arms of love on
the hard wood of the cross that everyone might come within
the reach of your saving embrace:  So clothe us in your Spirit
that we, reaching forth our hands in love, may bring those
who do not know you to the knowledge and love of you; for
the honor of your Name.  =Amen.=
 
*Here may be sung a hymn or anthem.*
 
*Authorized intercessions and thanksgivings may follow.*
 
*Before the close of the Office one or both of the following may be
used*
 
*The General Thanksgiving*
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Almighty God, Father of all mercies,
we your unworthy servants give you humble thanks
for all your goodness and loving-kindness
to us and to all whom you have made.
We bless you for our creation, preservation,
and all the blessings of this life;
but above all for your immeasurable love
in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory.
And, we pray, give us such an awareness of your mercies,
that with truly thankful hearts we may show forth your praise,
not only with our lips, but in our lives,
by giving up our selves to your service,
and by walking before you
in holiness and righteousness all our days;
through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom, with you and the Holy Spirit,
be honor and glory throughout all ages.  =Amen.=
 
<page 102>
 
*A Prayer of St. Chrysostom*
 
Almighty God, you have given us grace at this time with one
accord to make our common supplication to you; and you
have promised through your well-beloved Son that when two
or three are gathered together in his Name you will be in the
midst of them:  Fulfill now, O Lord, our desires and petitions
as may be best for us; granting us in this world knowledge of
your truth, and in the age to come life everlasting.  =Amen.=
 
*Then may be said*
 
Let us bless the Lord.
=Thanks be to God.=
 
*From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost "Alleluia, alleluia" may
be added to the preceding versicle and response.*
 
*The Officiant may then conclude with one of the following*
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with us all evermore.
=Amen.=  =2 Corinthians 13:14=
 
May the God of hope fill us with all joy and peace in
believing through the power of the Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
=Romans 15:13=
 
Glory to God whose power, working in us, can do infinitely
more than we can ask or imagine:  Glory to him from
generation to generation in the Church, and in Christ Jesus
for ever and ever.  =Amen.=  =Ephesians 3:20,21=
 
<page 103>
 
 
 
<An Order of Service
for Noonday>
 
*Officiant*  O God, make speed to save us.
 
*People*  O Lord, make haste to help us.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: as
it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*Except in Lent, add*  Alleluia.
 
*A suitable hymn may be sung.*
 
*One or more of the following Psalms is sung or said.  Other suitable
selections include Psalms 19,67, one or more sections of Psalm 119, or a
selection from Psalms 120 through 133.*
 
 
<Psalm 119>
 
105  Your word is a lantern to my feet *
 and a light upon my path.
 
106  I have sworn and am determined *
 to keep your righteous judgments.
 
<page 104>
 
107  I am deeply troubled; *
 preserve my life, O Lord, according to your word.
 
108  Accept, O LORD, the willing tribute of my lips, *
 and teach me your judgments.
 
109  My life is always in my hand, *
 yet I do not forget your law.
 
110  The wicked have set a trap for me, *
 but I have not strayed from your commandments.
 
111  Your decrees are my inheritance for ever; *
 truly, they are the joy of my heart.
 
112  I have applied my heart to fulfill your statues *
 for ever and to the end.
 
 
<Psalm 121>  =Levavi oculos=
 
1  I lift up my eyes to the hills; *
 from where is my help to come?
 
2  My help comes from the LORD, *
 the maker of heaven and earth.
 
3  He will not let your foot be moved *
 and he who watches over you will not fall asleep.
 
4  Behold, he who keeps watch over Israel *
 shall neither slumber nor sleep;
 
5  The LORD himself watches over you; *
 the LORD is your shade at your right hand,
 
6  So that the sun shall not strike you by day, *
 nor the moon by night.
 
7  The LORD shall preserve you from all evil; *
 it is he who shall keep you safe.
 
<page 105>
 
8  The LORD shall watch over your going out and your coming in, *
 from this time forth for evermore.
 
 
<Psalm 126>  =In convertendo=
 
1  When the LORD restored the fortunes of Zion, *
 then were we like those who dream.
 
2  Then was our mouth filled with laughter, *
 and our tongue with shouts of joy.
 
3  Then they said among the nations, *
 "The LORD has done great things for them."
 
4  The LORD has done great things for us, *
 and we are glad indeed.
 
5  Restore our fortunes, O LORD, *
 like the watercourses of the Negev.
 
6  Those who sowed with tears *
 will reap with songs of joy.
 
7  Those who go out weeping, carrying the seed, *
 will come again with joy, shouldering their sheaves.
 
 
*At the end of the Psalms is sung or said*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
*One of the following, or some other suitable passage of Scripture, is
read*
 
The love of God has been poured into our hearts through the
Holy Spirit that has been given to us.  =Romans 5:5=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*or the following*
 
<page 106>
 
If anyone is in Christ he is a new creation; the old has passed
away, behold the new has come.  All this is from God, who
through Christ reconciled us to himself and gave us the ministry
of reconciliation.  =2 Corinthians 5:17-18=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*or this*
 
From the rising of the sun to its setting my Name shall be
great among the nations, and in every place incense shall be
offered to my Name, and a pure offering; for my Name shall be
great among the nations, says the Lord of Hosts.  =Malachi 1:11=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*A meditation, silent or spoken, may follow.*
 
 
*The Officiant then begins the Prayers*
 
Lord, have mercy.
 
=Christ, have mercy.=
 
Lord, have mercy.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
/on earth as it is in heaven.
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
 as we forgive those
/who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
<parallel column>
 
Our Father in heaven,
 hallowed be you Name,
 your kingdom come,
 your will be done,
/on earth as in heaven.
 
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
 as we forgive those
/who sin against us.
 
Save us from the time of trial,
 and deliver us from evil.
 
For the kingdom, the power,
 and the glory are yours,
 now and for ever.  Amen.
 
<page 107>
 
 
*Officiant*  Lord, hear our prayer;
 
*People*  And let our cry come to you.
 
*Officiant*  Let us pray.
 
*The Officiant then says one of the following Collect.  If desired, the
Collect of the Day may be used.*
 
Heavenly Father, send your Holy Spirit into our hearts, to
direct and rule us according to your will, to comfort us in all
our afflictions, to defend us from all error, and to lead us into
all truth; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
Blessed Savior, at this hour you hung upon the cross,
stretching out your loving arms:  Grant that all the peoples of
the earth may look to you and be saved;  for your tender
mercies' sake.  =Amen.=
 
Almighty Savior, who at noonday called your servant Saint
Paul to be an apostle to the Gentiles:  We pray you to illumine
the world with the radiance of your glory, that all nations
may come and worship you; for you live and reign for ever
and ever.  =Amen.=
 
Lord Jesus Christ, you said to your apostles, "Peace I give to
you; my peace I leave with you:" Regard not our sins,
but the faith of your Church, and give to us the peace and
unity of that heavenly city, where with the Father and the
Holy Spirit you live and reign, now and for ever.  =Amen.=
 
*Free intercessions may be offered.*
 
 
*The service concludes as follows*
 
*Officiant*  Let us bless the Lord.
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
<page 108>
 
 
<Concerning the Service>
 
*This Order provides a form of evening service or vespers for use on
suitable occasions in the late afternoon or evening.  It may be used as
a complete rite in place of Evening Prayer, or as the introduction to
Evening Prayer or some other service, or as the prelude to an evening
meal or other activity.  It is appropriate also for use in private
houses.*
 
*Any part or parts of this service may be lead by lay persons.  A priest
or deacon, when presiding, should read the Prayer for Light, and the
Blessing or Dismissal at the end.  The bishop, when present, should give
the Blessing.*
 
*This order is not appropriate for use on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday
in Holy Week, or on Good Friday.  Easter Eve has its own form for the
Lighting of the Paschal Candle.*
 
*For the Short Lesson at the beginning of the service, any one of the
following is also appropriate, especially for the seasons suggested:*
 
<column 1>
 
Isaiah 60:19-20 (Advent)
 
Luke 12:35-37 (Advent)
 
John 1:1-5 (Christmas)
 
Isaiah 60:1-3 (Epiphany)
 
1 John 1:5-7 (Lent)
 
John 12:35-36a (Lent)
 
<column 2>
 
Revelation 21:10,22-24 (Easter)
 
Psalm 36:5-9 (Ascension)
 
Joel 2:28-30 (Whitsunday)
 
Colossians 1:9,11-14 (Saints' Days)
 
1 Peter 2:9 (Saints' Days)
 
Revelation 22:1,4-5 (Saints' Days)
 
*Any of the prayers in contemporary language may be adapted to
traditional language by changing the pronouns and the corresponding
verbs.*
 
*Additional Directions are on page 142.*
 
<page 109>
 
 
 
<An Order of Worship
for the Evening>
 
*The church is dark, or partially so, when the service is to begin.*
 
 
*All stand, and the Officiant greets the people with these words.*
 
Light and Peace, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
 
*In place of the above, from Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost*
 
*Officiant*  Alleluia.  Christ is risen.
*People*  The Lord is risen indeed.  Alleluia.
 
 
*In Lent and on other penitential occasions*
 
*Officiant*  Bless the Lord who forgives all our sins;
 
*People*  His mercy endures for ever.
 
 
*One of the following, or some other Short Lesson of Scripture
appropriate to the occasion or to the season, may then be read*
 
Jesus said, "You are the light of the world.  A city built on a
hill cannot be hid.  No one lights a lamp to put it under a
bucket, but on a lamp-stand where it gives light for everyone
in the house.  And you, like the lamp, must shed light among
your fellow men, so that they may see the deed you do, and
give glory to your Father in heaven."  =Matthew 5:14-16=
 
<page 110>
 
It is not ourselves that we proclaim; we proclaim Christ
Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants, for Jesus' sake.
For the same God who said, "Out of darkness let light shine,"
has caused his light to shine within us, to give the light of
revelation--the revelation of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ.  =2 Corinthians 4:5-6=
 
If I say, "Surely the darkness will cover me, and the light
around me turn to night," darkness is not dark to you, O
Lord; the night is as bright as the day; darkness and light to
you are both alike.  =Psalm 139:10-11=
 
 
*The Officiant then says the Prayer for Light, using any one of the
following for some other suitable prayer, first saying*
 
Let us pray.
 
Almighty God, we give you thanks for surrounding us, as
daylight fades, with the brightness of the vesper light; and we
implore you of your great mercy that, as you enfold us with
the radiance of this light, so you would shine into our hearts
the brightness of your Holy Spirit; through Jesus Christ our
Lord.  =Amen.=
 
Grant us, Lord, the lamp of charity which never fails, that it
may burn in us and shed its light on those around us, and
that by its brightness we may have a vision of that holy City,
where dwells the true and never-failing Light, Jesus Christ
our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
O Lord God Almighty, as you have taught us to call the
evening, the morning, and the noonday one day; and have
made the sun to know its going down:  Dispel the darkness of
our hearts, that by your brightness we may know you to be
the true God and eternal light, living and reigning for ever
and ever.  =Amen.=
 
<page 111>
 
Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord; and by thy
great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this
night; for the love of thy only Son, our Savior, Jesus Christ.
=Amen.=
 
 
*Advent*
 
*Collect for the First Sunday of Advent*
 
 
*Christmas, Epiphany, and other Feasts of the Incarnation*
 
*Collect for the First Sunday after Christmas*
 
 
*Lent and other times of penitence*
 
Almighty and most merciful God, kindle within us the fire of
love, that by its cleansing flame we may be purged of all our
sins and made worthy to worship you in spirit and in truth;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*Easter Season*
 
Eternal God, who led your ancient people into freedom by a
pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night:  Grant that
we who walk in the light of your presence may rejoice in the
liberty of the children of God; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
=Amen.=
 
 
*Festivals of Saints*
 
Lord Christ, your saints have been the lights of the world
in every generation:  Grant that we who follow in their
footsteps may be made worthy to enter with them into that
heavenly country where you live and reign for ever and ever.
=Amen.=
 
<page 112>
 
 
*The candles at the Altar are now lighted, as are other candles and
lamps as may be convenient.*
 
*During the candle-lighting, an appropriate anthem or psalm may be
sung, or silence kept.*
 
 
*The following hymn, or a metrical version of it, or some other hymn, is
then sung*
 
 
<O Gracious Light> =Phos hilaron=
 
O gracious light,
pure brightness of the everliving Father in heaven,
O Jesus Christ, holy and blessed!
 
Now as we come to the setting of the sun,
and our eyes behold the vesper light,
we sing your praised, O God:  Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
 
You are worthy at all times to be praised by happy voices,
O Son of God, O Giver of Life,
and to be glorified through all the worlds.
 
 
*The service may then continue in any of the following ways:*
 
*With Evening Prayer, beginning with the Psalms; or with some other
Office or Devotion;*
 
*With the celebration of the Holy Eucharist, beginning with the
Salutation and Collect of the Day;*
 
*Or, it may be followed by a meal or other activity, in which case Phos
hilaron may be followed by the Lord's Prayer and a grace or blessing;*
 
*Or, it may continue as a complete evening Office with the following
elements:*
 
<Selection from the Psalter.>  *Silence, or a suitable Collect, or both,
may follow the Psalmody.*
 
<Bible Reading.>  *A sermon or homily, a passage from Christian
literature,
or a brief silence, may follow the Reading.*
 
<Canticle.>  *The Magnificat or other canticle, or some other hymn of
praise.*
 
<Prayers.>  *A litany, or other suitable devotions, including the Lord's
Prayer.*
 
<Blessing or Dismissal,> *or both.  The Peace may then be exchanged.
 
 
*On feasts or other days of special significance, the Collect of the
Day, or one proper to the season, may precede the Blessing or Dismissal.
On other days, either of the following, or one of the Collects from
Evening Prayer or from Compline, may be so used.*
 
Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers, creator
of the changes of day and night, giving rest to the weary,
renewing the strength of those who are spent, bestowing
upon us occasions of song in the evening.  As you have
protected us in the day that is past, so be with us in the
coming night; keep us from every sin, every evil, and every
fear; for you are our light and salvation, and the strength of
our life.  To you be glory for endless ages.  =Amen.=
 
Almighty, everlasting God, let our prayer in your sight be as
incense, the lifting up of our hands as the evening sacrifice.
Give us grace to behold you, present in your Word and
Sacraments, and to recognize you in the lives of those around
us.  Stir up in us the flame of that love which burned in the
heart of your Son as he bore his passion, and let it burn in us
to eternal life and to the ages of ages.  =Amen.=
 
<page 114>
 
 
*A bishop or priest may use the following or some other blessing or
grace*
 
The Lord bless you and keep you.  =Amen.=
 
The Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you.
=Amen.=
 
The Lord lift up his countenance upon you and give you peace.  =Amen.=
 
*A deacon or lay person using the preceding blessing substitutes "us"
for "you."*
 
 
*A dismissal may be used (adding "Alleluia, alleluia" in Easter Season)*
 
 
*The People respond*
 
Thanks be to God.
 
 
*In Easter Season the People respond*
 
Thanks be to God.  Alleluia, alleluia.
 
<page 115>
 
 
 
<Daily Evening Prayer:
Rite Two>
 
*The Officiant begins the service with one or more of the following
sentences of Scripture, or of those on pages 75-78;*
 
*or with the Service of Light on pages 109-112, and continuing with the
appointed Psalmody;*
 
*or with the versicle "O God, make speed to save us" on page 117*
 
Let my prayer be set forth in your sight as incense, the lifting
up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.  =Psalm 141:2=
 
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and from the
Lord Jesus Christ.  =Philippians 1:2=
 
Worship the Lord in the beauty of his holiness; let the whole earth
tremble before him.  =Psalm 96:9=
 
Yours is the day, O God, yours also the night; you established
the moon and the sun.  You fixed all the boundaries of the
earth; you made both summer and winter.  =Psalm 74:15,16=
 
I will bless the Lord who gives me counsel; my heart teaches
me, night after night.  I have set the Lord always before me;
because he is at my right hand, I shall not fall.  =Psalm 16:7,8=
 
Seek him who made the Pleiades and Orion, and turns deep
darkness into the morning, and darkens the day into night;
who calls for the waters of the sea and pours them out upon
the surface of the earth:  The Lord is his name.  =Amos 5:8=
 
<page 116>
 
If I say, "Surely the darkness will cover me, and the light
around me turn to night,"  darkness is not dark to you, O
Lord; the night is as bright as the day; darkness and light to
you are both alike.  =Pslam 139:10,11=
 
Jesus said, "I am the light of the world; whoever follows me
will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life."
=John 8:12=
 
*The following Confession of Sin may then be said; or the Office may
continue at once with "O God make speed to save us."*
 
 
<Confession of Sin>
 
*The Officiant says to the people*
 
Dearly beloved, we have come together in the presence of
Almighty god our heavenly Father, to set forth his praise, to
hear his holy Word, and to ask, for ourselves and on behalf
of others, those things that are necessary for our life and our
salvation.  And so that we may prepare ourselves in heart and
mind to worship him, let us kneel in silence, and with
penitent and obedient hearts confess our sins, that we may
obtain forgiveness by his infinite goodness and mercy.
 
*or this*
 
Let us confess our sins against God and our neighbor.
 
*Silence may be kept.*
 
*Officiant and People together, all kneeling*
 
Most merciful God,
we confess that we have sinned against you
in thought, word, and deed,
by what we have done,
and by what we have left undone.
We have not loved you with our whole heart;
we have not loved our neighbors as ourselves.
We are truly sorry and we humbly repent.
<page 117>
For the sake of your Son Jesus Christ,
have mercy on us and forgive us;
that we may delight in your will,
and walk in your ways,
to the glory of your Name.  Amen.
 
*The Priest alone stands and says*
 
Almighty God have mercy on you, forgive you all your sins
through our Lord Jesus Christ, strengthen you in all
goodness, and by the power of the Holy Spirit keep you in
eternal life.  =Amen.=
 
*A deacon or lay person using the preceding form remains kneeling, and
substitutes "us" for "you" and "our" for "your."
 
 
<The Invitatory and Psalter>
 
*All stand*
 
*Officiant* O God, make speed to save us.
 
*People*  O Lord, make haste to help us.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: as
it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*Except in Lent, add*  Alleluia.
 
*The following, or some other suitable hymn, or an Invitatory Psalm, may
be sung or said.*
 
 
<O Gracious Light>  =Phos hilaron=
 
O gracious light,
pure brightness of the everliving Father in heaven,
O Jesus Christ, holy and blessed!
 
Now as we come to the setting of the sun,
and our eyes behold the vesper light,
we sing your praised, O God:  Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
 
You are worthy at all times to be praised by happy voices,
O Son of God, O Giver of Life,
and to be glorified through all the worlds.
 
*Then follows*
 
<The Psalm or Psalms Appointed>
 
*At the end of the Psalms is sung or said*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<The Lessons>
 
*One or two lessons, as appointed, are read, the Reader first saying
 
A Reading (Lesson) from &mdash..
 
*A citation giving chapter and verse may be added.*
 
<page 119>
 
*After each Lesson the Reader may say*
 
The Word of the Lord.
 
*Answer* Thanks be to God.
 
*Or the Reader may say* Here ends the Lesson (Reading).
 
*Silence may be kept after each Reading.  One of the following
Canticles, or one of those on pages 47-52, or 85-95, is sung or said
after each Reading.  If three lessons are used, the Lesson from the
Gospel is read after the second Canticle.*
 
 
<The Song of Mary>  =Magnificat=
 
=Luke 1:46-55=
 
My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord,
my spirit rejoices in God my Savior; *
 for he has looked with favor on his lowly servant.
 
From this day all generations will call me blessed: *
 the Almighty has done great things for me,
 and holy is his Name.
 
He has mercy on those who fear him *
 in every generation.
 
He has shown the strength of his arm, *
 he has scattered the proud in their conceit.
 
He has cast down the mighty from their thrones, *
 and has lifted up the lowly.
 
He has filled the hungry with good things, *
 and the rich he has sent away empty.
 
He has come to the help of his servant Israel, *
 for he has remembered his promise of mercy,
 
The promise he made to our fathers, *
 to Abraham and his children for ever.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
<page 120>
 
 
<Song of Simeon>  =Nunc Dimittis=
 
=Luke 2:29-32=
 
Lord, you now have set your servant free *
 to go in peace as you have promised;
 
For these eyes of mine have seen the Savior, *
 whom you have prepared for all the world to see:
 
A Light to enlighten the nations, *
 and the glory of your people Israel.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
<The Apostles' Creed>
 
*Officiant and People together, all standing*
 
I believe in God, the Father almighty,
 creator of heaven and earth.
 
I believe in Jesus Christ, his only son, our Lord.
 He was conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit
/and born of the Virgin Mary.
 He suffered under Pontius Pilate,
/was crucified, died, and was buried.
 He descended to the dead.
 On the third day he rose again.
 He ascended into heaven,
/and is seated at the right hand of the Father.
 He will come again to judge the living and the dead.
 
I believe in the Holy Spirit,
 the holy catholic Church,
 the communion of saints,
 the forgiveness of sins,
 the resurrection of the body,
 and the life everlasting.  Amen.
 
<page 121>
 
 
<The Prayers>
 
*The People stand or kneel*
 
*Officiant*  The Lord be with you.
 
*People*  And also with you.
 
*Officiant*  Let us pray.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
/on earth as it is in heaven.
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
 as we forgive those
/who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
<parallel column>
 
Our Father in heaven,
 hallowed be you Name,
 your kingdom come,
 your will be done,
/on earth as in heaven.
 
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
 as we forgive those
/who sin against us.
 
Save us from the time of trial,
 and deliver us from evil.
 
For the kingdom, the power,
 and the glory are yours,
 now and for ever.  Amen.
 
 
*Then follows one of these sets of Suffrages*
 
<Suffrages A>
 
&V.  Show us your mercy, O Lord;
 
&R.  And grant us your salvation.
 
&V.  Clothe your ministers with righteousness;
 
&R.  Let your people sing with joy.
 
&V.  Give peace, O Lord, in all the world;
 
&R.  For only in you can we live in safety.
 
<page 122>
 
&V.  Lord, keep this nation under your care;
 
&R.  And guide us in the way of justice and truth.
 
&V.  Let your way be known upon earth;
 
&R.  Your saving health among all nations.
 
&V.  Let not the needy, O Lord, be forgotten;
 
&R.  Nor the hope of the poor be taken away.
 
&V.  Create in us clean hearts, O God;
 
&R.  And sustain us by your Holy Spirit.
 
 
<Suffrages B>
 
That this evening may be holy, good, and peaceful,
=We entreat you, O Lord.=
 
That your holy angels may lead us in paths of peace and
goodwill,
=We entreat you, O Lord.=
 
That we may be pardoned and forgiven for our sins
and offenses,
=We entreat you, O Lord.=
 
That there may be peace to your Church and to the whole
world,
=We entreat you, O Lord.=
 
That we may depart this life in your faith and fear,
and not be condemned before the great judgment seat
of Christ,
=We entreat you, O Lord.=
 
That we may be bound together by your Holy Spirit in
the communion of [&3m. and ] all your saints,
entrusting one another and all our life to Christ,
=We entreat you, O Lord.=
 
*The Officiant then says one or more of the following Collects*
 
*The Collect of the Day*
 
<page 123>
 
 
*A Collect for Sundays*
 
O God, you make us glad with the weekly remembrance of
the glorious resurrection of you Son our Lord:  Give us this
day such blessing through our worship of you, that the week
to come may be spent in your favor; through Jesus Christ our
Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Fridays*
 
Almighty God, whose most dear Son went not up to joy but
first he suffered pain, and entered not into glory before he
was crucified:  Mercifully grant that we, walking in the way
of the cross, may find it none other than the way of life and
peace; through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Saturdays*
 
Almighty God, who after the creation of the world rested
from all you works and sanctified a day of rest for all your
creatures:  Grant that we, putting away all earthly anxieties,
may be duly prepared for the service of your sanctuary, and
that our rest here upon earth may be a preparation for the
eternal rest promised to your people in heaven; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Peace*
 
O God, the author of peace and lover of concord, to know
you is eternal life and to serve you is perfect freedom:  Defend
us, your humble servants, in all assaults of our enemies; that
we, surely trusting in your defense, may not fear the power of
any adversaries; through the might of Jesus Christ our Lord,
=Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for Aid against Perils*
 
Be our light in the darkness, O Lord, and in your great mercy
defend us from all perils and dangers of this night; for the love
of your only Son, our Savior Jesus Christ.  =Amen.=
 
<page 124>
 
 
*A Collect for Projection*
 
O God, the life of all who live, the light of the faithful, the
strength of those who labor, and the repose of the dead:  We
thank you for the blessings of the day that is past, and
humbly ask for your protection through the coming night.
Bring us in safety to the morning hours; through him who
died and rose again for us, your Son our Savior Jesus Christ.
=Amen.=
 
 
*A Collect for the Presence of Christ*
 
Lord Jesus, stay with us, for evening is at hand and the day
is past; be our companion in the way, kindle our hearts, and
awaken hope, that we may know you as you are revealed in
Scripture and the breaking of bread.  Grant this for the sake
of your love.  =Amen.=
 
 
*Then, unless the Eucharist or a form of general intercession is to
follow, one of these prayer for mission is added*
 
O God and Father of all, whom the whole heavens adore:
Let the whole earth also worship you, all nations obey you,
all tongues confess and bless you, and mean and women
everywhere love you and serve you in peace; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*or this*
 
Keep watch, dear Lord, with those who work, or watch, or
weep this night, and give your angels charge over those who
sleep.  Tend the sick, Lord Christ; give rest to the weary, bless
the dying, soothe the suffering, pity the afflicted, shield the
joyous; and all for your love's sake.  =Amen.=
 
*or the following*
 
<page 125>
 
O God, you manifest in your servants the signs of your
presence:  Send forth upon us the spirit of love, that in
companionship with one another your abounding grace may
increase among us; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*Here may be sung a hymn or anthem.*
 
*Authorized intercessions and thanksgivings may follow.*
 
*Before the close of the Office one or both of the following may be
used*
 
 
*The General Thanksgiving*
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Almighty God, Father of all mercies,
we your unworthy servants give you humble thanks
for all your goodness and loving-kindness
to us and to all whom you have made.
We bless you for our creation, preservation,
and all the blessings of this life;
but above all for your immeasurable love
in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory.
And, we pray, give us such an awareness of your mercies,
that with truly thankful hearts we may show forth your praise,
not only with our lips, but in our lives,
by giving up our selves to your service,
and by walking before you
in holiness and righteousness all our days;
through Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom, with you and the Holy Spirit,
be honor and glory throughout all ages.  =Amen.=
 
<page 126>
 
 
*A Prayer of St. Chrysostom*
 
Almighty God, you have given us grace at this time with one
accord to make our common supplication to you; and you
have promised through your well-beloved Son that when two
or three are gathered together in his Name you will be in the
midst of them:  Fulfill now, O Lord, our desires and petitions
as may be best for us; granting us in this world knowledge of
your truth, and in the age to come life everlasting.  =Amen.=
 
*Then may be said*
 
Let us bless the Lord.
=Thanks be to God.=
 
*From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost "Alleluia, alleluia" may
be added to the preceding versicle and response.*
 
 
*The Officiant may then conclude with one of the following*
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with us all evermore.
=Amen.=  =2 Corinthians 13:14=
 
May the God of hope fill us with all joy and peace in
believing through the power of the Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
=Romans 15:13=
 
Glory to God whose power, working in us, can do infinitely
more than we can ask or imagine:  Glory to him from
generation to generation in the Church, and in Christ Jesus
for ever and ever.  =Amen.=  =Ephesians 3:20,21=
 
<page 127>
 
 
 
<An Order for Compline>
 
*The Officiant begins*
 
The Lord Almighty grant us a peaceful night and a perfect
end.  =Amen.=
 
*Officiant*  Our help is in the Name of the Lord;
 
*People*  The maker of heaven and earth.
 
 
*The Officiant may then say*
 
Let us confess our sins to God.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Almighty God, our heavenly Father:
We have sinned against you,
through our own fault,
in thought, and word, and deed,
and in what we have left undone.
For the sake of your Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
forgive us all our offenses;
and grant that we may serve you
in newness of life,
to the glory of your Name.  Amen.
 
*Officiant*
 
May the Almighty God grant us forgiveness of all our sins,
and the grace and comfort of the Holy Spirit.  =Amen.=
 
 
*The Officiant then says*
 
O God, make speed to save us.
 
*People*  O Lord, make haste to help us.
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:  as
it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*Except in Lent, add*  Alleluia.
 
*One or more of the following Psalms are sung or said.  Other suitable
selections may be substituted.*
 
 
<Psalm 4>  =Cum invocarem=
 
1  Answer me when I call, O God, defender of my cause; *
 you set me free when I am hard-pressed;
 have mercy on me and hear my prayer.
 
2  "You mortals, how long will you dishonor my glory; *
 how long will you worship dumb idols
 and run after false gods?"
 
3  Know that the LORD does wonders for the faithful; *
 when I call upon the LORD, he will hear me.
 
4  Tremble, then, and do not sin; *
 speak to your heart in silence upon your bead.
 
5  Offer the appointed sacrifices *
 and put your trust in the LORD.
 
<page 129>
 
6  Many are saying,
"Oh, that we might see better times!" *
 Lift up the light of your countenance upon us, O LORD.
 
7  You have put gladness in my heart, *
 more than when grain and wine and oil increase.
 
8  I lie down in peace; at once I fall asleep; *
 for only you, LORD, make me dwell in safety.
 
 
<Psalm 31>  =In te, Domine, speravi=
 
1  In you, O LORD, have I taken refuge;
let me never be put to shame: *
 deliver me in your righteousness.
 
2  Incline your ear to me; *
 make haste to deliver me.
 
3  Be my strong rock, a castle to keep me safe,
for you are my crag and my stronghold; *
 for the sake of your Name, lead me and guide me.
 
4  Take me out of the net that they have secretly set for me, *
 for you are my tower of strength.
 
5  Into your hands I commend my spirit, *
 for you have redeemed me,
 O LORD, O God of truth.
 
 
<Psalm 91> =Qui habitat=
 
1  He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High *
 abides under the shadow of the Almighty.
 
2  He shall say to the LORD,
"You are my refuge and my stronghold, *
 my God in whom I put my trust."
 
<page 130>
 
3  He shall deliver you from the snare of the hunter *
 and from the deadly pestilence.
 
4  he shall cover you with his pinions,
and you shall find refuge under his wings; *
 his faithfulness shall be a shield and buckler.
 
5  You shall not be afraid of any terror by night, *
 nor of the arrow that flies by day;
 
6  Of the plague that stalks in the darkness, *
 nor of the sickness that lays waste at mid-day.
 
7  A thousand shall fall at your side
and ten thousand at your right hand, *
 but it shall not come near you.
 
8  Your eyes only have to behold *
 to see the reward of the wicked.
 
9  Because you have made the LORD your refuge, *
 and the Most High your habitation,
 
10  There shall no evil happen to you, *
 neither shall any plague come near your dwelling.
 
11  For he shall give his angels charge over you, *
 to keep you in all your ways.
 
12  They shall bear you in their hands, *
 lest you dash your foot against a stone.
 
13  You shall tread upon the lion and the adder; *
 you shall trample the young lion and the serpent
/under your feet.
 
14  Because he is bound to me in love,
therefore will I deliver him; *
 I will protect him, because he knows my Name.
 
<page 131>
 
15  He shall call upon me, and I will answer him; *
 I am with him in trouble;
 I will rescue him and bring him to honor.
 
16  With long life will I satisfy him, *
 and show him my salvation.
 
 
<Psalm 134>  =Ecce nunc=
 
1  Behold now, bless the LORD, all you servants of the LORD, *
 you that stand by night in the house of the LORD.
 
2  Lift up your hands in the holy place and bless the LORD; *
 the LORD who made heaven and earth bless you out of Zion.
 
 
*At the end of the Psalms is sung or said*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:  *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
*One of the following, or some other suitable passage of Scripture, is
read*
 
Lord, you are in the midst of us, and we are called by your
Name:  Do not forsake us, O Lord our God.  =Jeremiah 14:9,22=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*or this*
 
Come to me, all who labor and are heavy-laden, and I will
give you rest.  Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me;
for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for
your souls.  For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
=Matthew 11:28-30=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*or the following*
 
<page 132>
 
May the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, and great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of
the eternal covenant, equip you with everything good that you
may do his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his
sight; through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever.  =Hebrews 13:20-21=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*or this*
 
Be sober, be watchful.  Your adversary the devil prowls
around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour.
Resist him, firm in your faith.  =1 Peter 5:8-9a=
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*A hymn suitable for the evening may be sung.*
 
 
*Then follows*
 
&V.  Into your hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit;
 
&R.  For you have redeemed me, O Lord, O God of truth.
 
&V.  Keep us, O Lord, as the apple of your eye;
 
&R.  Hide us under the shadow of your wings.
 
 
Lord, have mercy.
 
=Christ, have mercy.=
 
Lord, have mercy.
 
 
*Officiant and People*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
/on earth as it is in heaven.
 
<page 133>
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
 as we forgive those
/who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
<parallel column>
 
Our Father in heaven,
 hallowed be you Name,
 your kingdom come,
 your will be done,
/on earth as in heaven.
 
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
 as we forgive those
/who sin against us.
 
Save us from the time of trial,
 and deliver us from evil.
 
For the kingdom, the power,
 and the glory are yours,
 now and for ever.  Amen.
 
 
*Officiant*  Lord, hear our prayer;
 
*People*  And let our cry come to you.
 
*Officiant*  Let us pray.
 
 
*The Officiant then says one of the following Collects*
 
Be our light in the darkness, O Lord, and in your great mercy
defend us from all perils and dangers of this night; for the
love of your only Son, our Savior Jesus Christ.  =Amen.=
 
Be present, O merciful God, and protect us through the hours
of this night, so that we who are wearied by the changes and
chances of this life may rest in your eternal changelessness;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
Look down, O Lord, from your heavenly throne, and
illumine this night with your celestial brightness; that by
night as by day your people may glorify your holy Name;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
Visit this place, O Lord, and drive far from it all snare of the
enemy; let your holy angels dwell with us to preserve us in
peace; and let your blessing be upon us always; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
<page 134>
 
 
*A Collect for Saturdays*
 
We give thanks, O God, for revealing your Son Jesus
Christ to us by the light of his resurrection:  Grant that as we
sing your glory at the close of this day, our joy may abound
in the morning as we celebrate the Paschal mystery; through
Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
 
*One of the following prayers may be added*
 
Keep watch, dear Lord, with those who work, or watch, or
weep this night, and give your angels charge over those who
sleep.  Tend the sick, Lord Christ; give rest to the weary, bless
the dying, soothe the suffering, pity the afflicted, shield the
joyous; and all for your love's sake.  =Amen.=
 
*or this*
 
O God, your unfailing providence sustains the world we live
in and the life we live:  Watch over those, both night and day,
who work while others sleep, and grant that we may never
forget that our common life depends upon each other's toil;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
*Silence may be kept, and free intercessions and thanksgivings may be
offered.*
 
 
*The service concludes with the Song of Simeon with this Antiphon, which
is sung or said by all*
 
Guide us waking, O Lord, and guard us sleeping; that awake
we may watch with Christ, and asleep we may rest in peace.
 
*In Easter Season, add*  Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
 
<page 135>
 
Lord, you now have set your servant free *
 to go in peace as you have promised;
 
For these eyes of mine have seen the Savior, *
 whom you have prepared for all the world to see:
 
A Light to enlighten the nations, *
 and the glory of your people Israel.
 
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
Guide us waking, O Lord, and guard us sleeping; that awake
we may watch with Christ, and asleep we may rest in peace.
 
*In Easter Season, add*  Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
 
 
*Officiant*  Let us bless the Lord.
 
*People*  Thanks be to God.
 
*The Officiant concludes*
 
The almighty and merciful Lord, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
bless us and keep us.  =Amen.=
 
<page 136>
 
 
 
<Daily Devotions for
Families and Individuals>
 
*These devotions follow the basic structure of the Daily Office of the
Church.*
 
*When more than one person is present, the Reading and the Collect
should be read by one person, and the other parts said in unison, or in
some other convenient manner.  (For suggestions about reading the
Psalms, see page 582.)*
 
*For convenience, appropriate Psalms, Readings, and Collects are
provided in each service.  When desired, however, the Collect of the
Day, or any of the Collects appointed in the Daily Offices, may be used
instead.*
 
*The Psalms and Readings may be replaced by those appointed in*
 
*a) the Lectionary for Sundays, Holy Days, the Common of Saints, and
Various Occasions, page 888.*
 
*b) the Daily Office Lectionary, page 934*
 
*c) some other manual of devotion which provides daily selections for
the
Church Year.*
 
 
<In the Morning>
 
*From Psalm 51*
 
Open my lips, O Lord, *
 and my mouth shall proclaim your praise.
 
Create in me a clean heart, O God, *
 and renew a right spirit within me.
 
Cast me not away from your presence *
 and take not your holy Spirit from me.
 
Give me the joy of your saving help again *
 and sustain me with your bountiful Spirit.
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: *
 as it was in the beginning, is now, and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
 
*A Reading*
 
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ!
By his great mercy we have been born anew to a living hope
through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.
=1 Peter 1:3=
 
*A period of silence my follow.*
 
*A hymn or canticle may be used; the Apostles' Creed may be said.*
 
*Prayers may be offered for ourselves and others.*
 
*The Lord's Prayer*
 
*The Collect*
 
Lord God, almighty and everlasting Father, you have brought
us in safety to this new day:  Preserve us with your mighty
power, that we may not fall into sin, nor be overcome by
adversity; and in all we do, direct us to the fulfilling of your
purpose; through Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
<page 138>
 
 
<At Noon>
 
*From Psalm 113*
 
Give praise, you servants of the LORD; *
 praise the Name of the LORD.
 
Let the Name of the LORD be blessed, *
 from this time forth for evermore.
 
From the rising of the sun to its going down *
 let the Name of the LORD be praised.
 
The LORD is high above all nations, *
 and his glory above the heavens.
 
*A Reading*
 
O God, you will keep in perfect peace those whose minds are
fixed on you; for in returning and rest we shall be saved; in
quietness and trust shall be our strength.  =Isaiah 26:3; 30:15=
 
*Prayers may be offered for ourselves and others.*
 
*The Lord's Prayer*
 
*The Collect*
 
Blessed Savior, at this hour you hung upon the cross,
stretching out your loving arms:  Grant that all the peoples of
the earth may look to you and be saved; for your mercies'
sake.  =Amen.=
 
*or this*
 
Lord Jesus Christ, you said to your apostles, "Peace I give to
you; my own peace I leave with you:"  Regard not our sins,
but the faith of your Church, and give to us the peace and
unity of that heavenly City, where with the Father and the
Holy Spirit you live and reign, now and for ever.  =Amen.=
 
<page 138>
 
 
<In the Early Evening>
 
*This devotion my be used before or after the evening meal.*
 
*The Order of Worship for the Evening, page 109, may be used instead.*
 
O gracious light,
pure brightness of the everliving Father in heaven,
O Jesus Christ, holy and blessed!
 
Now as we come to the setting of the sun,
and our eyes behold the vesper light,
we sing your praised, O God:  Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
 
You are worthy at all times to be praised by happy voices,
O Son of God, O Giver of Life,
and to be glorified through all the worlds.
 
*A Reading*
 
It is not ourselves that we proclaim; we proclaim Christ
Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants, for Jesus' sake.
For the same God who said, "Out of darkness let light
shine," has caused his light to shine within us, to give the
light of revelation--the revelation of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ.  =2 Corinthians 4:5-6=
 
*Prayers may be offered for ourselves and others.*
 
*The Lord's Prayer*
 
*The Collect*
 
Lord Jesus, stay with us, for evening is at hand and the day is
past; be our companion in the way, kindle our hearts, and
awaken hope, that we may know you as you are revealed in
Scripture and the breaking of bread.  Grant this for the sake
of your love.  =Amen.=
 
<page 140>
 
 
<At the Close of Day>
 
 
<Psalm 134>
 
Behold now, bless the LORD, all you servants of the LORD, *
 you that stand by night in the house of the LORD.
 
Lift up your hands in the holy place and bless the LORD; *
 the LORD who made heaven and earth bless you out of Zion.
 
*A Reading*
 
Lord, you are in the midst of us and we are called by your
Name:  Do not forsake us, O Lord our God.  =Jeremiah 14:9,22=
 
*The following may be said*
 
Lord, you now have set your servant free *
 to go in peace as you have promised;
 
For these eyes of mine have seen the Savior, *
 whom you have prepared for all the world to see;
 
A Light to enlighten the nations, *
 and the glory of your people Israel.
 
*Prayers for ourselves and others may follow.  It is appropriate that
prayers of thanksgiving for the blessings of the day, and penitence for
our
sins, be included.*
 
*The Lord's Prayer*
 
*The Collect*
 
Visit this place, O Lord, and drive far from it all snares of the
enemy; let your holy angles dwell with us to preserve us in
peace; and let your blessing be upon us always; through Jesus
Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
The almighty and merciful Lord, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
bless us and keep us.  =Amen.=
 
<page 141>
 
 
<Additional Directions>
 
 
*Morning and Evening Prayer*
 
*Any of the opening sentences of Scripture, including those listed for
specific seasons or days, may be used at any time according to the
discretion of the officiant.*
 
*The proper antiphons on pages 43-44 and 80-82 may be used as refrains
with either of the invitatory Psalms.*
 
*Antiphons drawn from the Psalms themselves, or from the opening
sentences given in the Offices, or from other passages of Scripture may
be used with the Psalms and biblical Canticles.*
 
*Gloria Patri is always sung or said at the conclusion of the entire
portion of the Psalter; and may be used after the Invitatory Psalm or
the Canticle "Christ our Passover," after each Psalm, and after each
section of Psalm 119.*
 
*The Gloria printed at the conclusion of certain Canticles may be
omitted when desired.*
 
*The following pointing of the Gloria may be used:*
 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, *
 and to the Holy Spirit:
 
As it was in the beginning, is now, *
 and will be for ever.  Amen.
 
*In Rite One services of Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer, the
following form of the Gloria may be used:*
 
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, *
 and to the Holy Ghost:
 
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, *
 world without end.  Amen.
 
*Metrical versions of the Invitatory Psalms, and of the Canticles after
the Readings, may be used.*
 
<page 142>
 
*In special circumstances, in place of a Canticle, a hymn may be sung.*
 
*The Apostles' Creed is omitted from the Office when the Eucharist with
its own Creed is to follow.  It may also be omitted at one of the
Offices on weekdays.*
 
*The Lord's Prayer may be omitted from the Office when the Litany or the
Eucharist is to follow immediately.*
 
*In the Intercessions and Thanksgivings, opportunity may be given for
the members of the congregation to express intentions or objects of
prayer and thanksgiving, either at the bidding, or in the course of the
prayer; and opportunity may be given for silent prayer.*
 
*A sermon may be preached after the Office; or, within the Office, after
the Readings or at the time of the hymn or anthem after the Collects.*
 
*On occasion, at the discretion of the Minister, a reading from
non-biblical Christian literature may follow the biblical Readings.*
 
*An offering may be received and presented at the Office.*
 
 
*When there is Communion*
 
*When Morning or Evening Prayer is used as the Liturgy of the Word at
the Eucharist, the Nicene Creed may take the place of the Apostles'
Creed, and the officiant may pass at once from the salutation "The Lord
be with you," and its response, to the Collect of the Day.  A Lesson
from the Gospel is always included.*
 
*The Intercessions on such occasions are to conform to the directions on
page 383.*
 
*The service then continues with the [Peace and] Offeratory.*
 
 
*Order of Worship for the Evening*
 
*Before this service, there should be as little artificial light as
possible in
the church.  A musical prelude or processional is not appropriate.*
 
*When the ministers enter, one or two lighted candles may be carried
<page 143>
before them, and used to provide light for reading the opening Short
Lesson and Prayer for Light.  From Easter Day through the Day of
Pentecost, the Paschal Candle, if used, should be burning in its
customary place before the people assemble; the officiant then goes to a
place close by it to begin the service by its light.*
 
*The Short Lessons may be read from any version of the Scriptures
authorized for public worship in this Church, and should be read without
announcement or conclusion.  When one or more Scripture Lessons are to
be read later in the service, the Short Lesson may be omitted.*
 
*For the lighting of the candles at the Altar and elsewhere, in Easter
Season the flame may be taken from the Paschal Candle.  At other times,
the candle or candles carried in at the beginning of the service may be
placed on or near the Altar, and other candles may be lighted from them.
During Advent, the lighting of an Advent Wreath may take place after
the Prayer for Light.  On special occasions, lighted candles may be
distributed to members of the congregation.*
 
*When this service is used in private houses, candles may be lighted at
the dining table, or at some other convenient place.*
 
*If incense is to be used, it is appropriate after the candles have been
lighted and while the hymn Phos hilaron is being sung.*
 
*When this service continues as a complete Office, Psalms and Lessons
from the Office Lectionary or the Proper of the Day, or ones suitable to
the season or the occasion, may be used.  Psalms generally appropriate
to the evening include:  8, 23, 27, 36, 84, 93, 113, 114, 117, 121, 134,
139, 141, 143.  When desired, more than one Lesson may be read, with
silence or singing between them.*
 
*If an additional hymn is desired, it may be sung immediately before the
Blessing or Dismissal.*
 
*When a meal is to follow, a blessing over food may serve as the
conclusion of this form of service.*
 
<page 144>
 
 
<Suggested Canticles at Morning Prayer>
 
: After the Old Testament Reading; After the New Testament Reading
 
Sun. : 4. or 16. Benedictus Dominus; 7. or 21. Te Deum laudamus
  Advent : 11. Surge, illuminare; 4. or 16. Benedictus Dominus
  Lent : 14. Kyrie Pantokrator; 4. or 16. Benedictus Dominus
  Easter : 8. Cantemus Domino
 
Mon. : 9. Ecce, Deus; 19. Magna et mirabilia
 
Tue. : 2. or 13. Benedictus es; 18. Dignus es
 
Wed. : 11. Surge, illuminare; 4. or 16. Benedictus Dominus
  Lent : 14. Kyrie Pantokrator;
 
Thu. : 8. Cantemus Domino ; 6. or 20. Gloria in excelsis
  Advent and Lent : ; 19. Magna et mirabilia
 
Fri. : 10. =Quaerite Dominum=; 18. =Dignus es=
  Lent : 14. Kyrie Pantokrator;
 
Sat. : 1. or 12. Benedicite; 19.  Magna et mirabilia
 
*On Feasts of our Lord and other Major Feasts* :
  4. or 16 Benedictus Dominus; 7. or 21. Te Deum laudamus
 
<page 145>
 
 
<Suggested Canticles at Evening Prayer>
 
: After the Old Testament Reading; After the New Testament Reading
 
Sun. : Magnificat; Nunc Dimittis **
 
Mon. : 8. Cantemus Domino; Nunc Dimittis
  Lent: 14. Kyrie Pantokrator;
 
Tue. : 10. Quaerite Dominum; Magnificat
 
Wed. : 1. or 12. Benedicite; Nunc Dimittis
 
Thu. : 11. Surge, illuminare; Magnificat
 
Fri. : 2. or 13. Benedictus es; Nunc Dimittis
 
Sat. : 9. Ecce, Deus; Magnificat
 
*On Feasts of our Lord and other Major Feasts* :
  Magnificat; Nunc Dimittis**
 
** *If only one Reading is used, the suggested Canticle is the
Magnificat.*
 
<page 146>
 
 
<Psalm 95:  Traditional> =Venite, exultemus=
 
O come, let us sing unto the Lord; *
 let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.
 
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, *
 and show ourselves glad in him with psalms.
 
 
For the Lord is a great God, *
 and a great King above all gods.
 
In his hand are all the corners of the earth, *
 and the strength of the hills are his also.
 
The sea is his and he made it, *
 and his hands prepared the dry land.
 
 
O come, let us worship and fall down *
 and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
 
For he is the lord our God, *
 and we are the people of his pasture
 and the sheep of his hand.
 
 
Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts *
 as in the provocation,
 and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness;
 
When your fathers tempted me, *
 proved me, and saw my works.
 
 
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, *
 It is a people that do err in their hearts,
 for they have not known my ways.
 
Unto whom I sware in my wrath, *
 that they should not enter into my rest.
 
<page 147>
 
The Great Litany
 
<page 148>
 
 
 
<The Great Litany>
 
*To be said or sung, kneeling, standing, or in procession; before the
Eucharist or after the Collects of Morning or Evening Prayer; or
separately; especially in Lent and on Rogation days.*
 
O God the Father, Creator of heaven and earth,
=Have mercy upon us.=
 
O God the Son, Redeemer of the world,
=Have mercy upon us.=
 
O God the Holy Spirit, Sanctifier of the faithful,
=Have mercy upon us.=
 
O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, one God,
=Have mercy upon us.=
 
Remember not, Lord Christ, our offenses, nor the offenses
of our forefathers; neither reward us according to our sins.
Spare us, good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou hast
redeemed with thy most precious blood, and by thy mercy
preserve us, for ever.
=Spare us, good Lord.=
 
From all evil and wickedness; from sin; from the crafts
and assaults of the devil; and from everlasting damnation,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
<page 149>
 
From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory,
and hypocrisy; from envy, hatred, and malice; and from all want
of charity,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
From all inordinate and sinful affections; and from all the
deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devil,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
From all false doctrine, heresy, and schism; from hardness
of heart, and contempt of thy Word and commandment,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
From lightening and tempest; from earthquake, fire, and
flood; from plague, pestilence, and famine,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
From all oppression, conspiracy, and rebellion; from
violence, battle, and murder; and from dying suddenly
and unprepared,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity
and submission to the Law; by thy Baptism, Fasting, and
Temptation,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
By thine Agony and Bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion;
by thy precious Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection
and Ascension; and by the Coming of thy Holy Ghost,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our prosperity; in
the hour of death, and in the day of judgment,
=Good Lord, deliver us.=
 
<page 150>
 
We sinners do beseech the to hear us, O Lord God; and that
it may please thee to rule and govern thy holy Church
Universal in the right way,
=We beesech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to illumine all bishops, priests, and
deacons, with true knowledge and understanding of thy
Word; and that both by their preaching and living, they may
set it forth, and show it accordingly,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to send forth laborers into thy
harvest, and to draw all mankind into thy kingdom,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to give to all people increase of grace
to hear and receive thy Word, and to bring forth the fruits of
the Spirit,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such
as have erred, and are deceived,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to give us a heart to love and fear
thee, and diligently to live after thy commandments,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee so to rule the hearts of thy servants,
the President of the United States (=or= of this nation), and all
others in authority, that they may do justice, and love mercy,
and walk in the ways of truth,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
<page 151>
 
That it may please thee to make wars to cease in all the world;
to give to all nations unity, peace, and concord; and to
bestow freedom upon all peoples,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to show thy pity upon all prisoners
and captives, the homeless and the hungry, and all who are
desolate and oppressed,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the
bountiful fruits of the earth, so that in due time all may enjoy
them,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to inspire us, in our several callings,
to do the work which thou givest us to do with singleness of
heart as thy servants, and for the common good,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to preserve all who are in danger by
reason of their labor or their travel,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to preserve, and provide for, all
women in childbirth, young children and orphans, the
widowed, and all whose homes are broken or torn by strife,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to visit the lonely; to strengthen all
who suffer in mind, body, and spirit; and to comfort with thy
presence those who are failing and infirm,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to support, help, and comfort all who
are in danger, necessity, and tribulation,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
<page 152>
 
That it may please thee to have mercy upon all mankind,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to give us true repentance; to forgive
us all our sins, negligences, and ignorances; and to endue
us with the grace of thy Holy Spirit to amend our lives
according to thy holy Word,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors,
and slanderers, and to turn their hearts,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand; to
comfort and help the weak-hearted; to raise up those who
fall; and finally to beat down Satan under our feet,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to grant to all the faithful departed
eternal life and peace,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
That it may please thee to grant that, in the fellowship of
[&mdash. and] all the saints, we may attain to thy
heavenly kingdom,
=We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.=
 
Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.
=Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.=
 
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world,
=Have mercy upon us.=
 
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world,
=Have mercy upon us.=
 
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world,
=Grant us thy peace.=
 
<page 153>
 
O Christ, hear us.
=O Christ, hear us.=
 
Lord, have mercy upon us.
=Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
 
*or*
 
Kyrie Eleison.
=Christe Eleison.=
Kyrie Eleison.
 
*When the Litany is sung or said immediately before the Eucharist, the
Litany concludes here, and the Eucharist begins with the Salutation and
the Collect of the Day.*
 
*On all other occasions, the Officiant and People say together*
 
Our Father, who art in heaven,
 hallowed be they Name,
 thy kingdom come,
 thy will be done,
/on earth as it is in heaven.
 
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
 as we forgive those
/who trespass against us.
 
And lead us not into temptation,
 but deliver us from evil.
 
For thine is the kingdom,
 and the power, and the glory,
 for ever and ever.  Amen.
 
&V.  O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us;
 
&R.  As we do put our trust in thee.
 
*The Officiant concludes with the following or some other Collect*
 
Let us pray.
 
Almighty God, who hast promised to hear the petitions of
those who ask in thy Son's Name: We beseech thee mercifully
to incline thine ear to us who have now made our prayers
and supplications unto thee; and grant that those things
which we have asked faithfully according to thy will, may be
obtained effectually, to the relief of our necessity, and to the
setting forth of thy glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord. =Amen.=
 
<page 154>
 
*The Officiant may add other Prayers, and end the Litany, saying*
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore.
=Amen.=
 
 
<The Supplication>
 
*For use in the Litany in place of the Versicle and Collect which
follows the Lord's Prayer; or at the end or Morning or Evening Prayer;
or as a separate devotion; especially in times of war, or of national
anxiety, or of disaster.*
 
O Lord, arise, help us;
=And deliver us for thy Name's sake.=
 
O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have
declared unto us, the noble works that thou didst in their
days, and in the old time before them.
 
=O Lord, arise, help us;
and deliver us for thy Name's sake.=
 
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost; as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen.
 
=O Lord, arise, help us;
and deliver us for thy Name's sake.=
 
&V.  From our enemies defend us, O Christ;
 
&R.  Graciously behold our afflictions.
 
&V.  With pity behold the sorrows of our hearts;
 
&R.  Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.
 
<page 155>
 
&V.  Favorably with mercy hear our prayers;
 
&R.  O Son of David, have mercy upon us.
 
&V.  Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ;
 
&R.  Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.
 
*The Officiant concludes*
 
Let us pray.
 
We humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon
our infirmities; and, for the glory of your Name, turn from us
all those evils that we most justly have deserved; and grant
that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and
confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory; through our
only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord.  =Amen.=
 
<page 156>
 
<page 157>
 
 
-------------------(BCPOFFCE.TXT Version 1.0)------------------
